User requirements for inclusive technology for older adults
Mlađan Jovanović
Department for Computer Science, Singidunum University, Belgrade, Serbia
Antonella De Angeli
Department for Computer Science, Free University of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
Andrew McNeill
Department of Psychology, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
Lynne Coventry
Department of Psychology, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
mjovanovic@singidunum.ac.rs (corresponding author)
antonella.deangeli@unibz.it
andrew.mcneill@northumbria.ac.uk
lynne.coventry@northumbria.ac.uk
1
User requirements for inclusive technology for older adults
Abstract. Active aging technologies are increasingly designed to support an
active lifestyle. However, the way in which they are designed can raise different
barriers to acceptance of and use by older adults. Their designers can adopt a
negative stereotype of aging. Thorough understanding of user requirements is
central to this problem. This paper investigates user requirements for
technologies that encourage an active lifestyle and provide older people with the
means to self-manage their physical, mental, and emotional health. This requires
consideration of the person and the sociotechnical context of use. We describe
our work in collecting and analyzing older adults’ requirements for a technology
which enables an active lifestyle. The main contribution of the paper is a model
of user requirements for inclusive technology for older people.
Keywords: older adults; active aging technology; user requirements; user
desires; robotic walker; tablet; social network, recommender system.
1. Introduction 1
An active lifestyle in later life is essential for older adults to maintain and facilitate their
well-being. In our work, we adopt the World Health Organization's (WHO's) standard
of age 60 and above as discriminant to consider a person as "older" (WHO, 2002).
Previous research in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) has been mainly focused on
the physical decline in old age, defining it as a deficit to be solved by technology
(Cozza et al., 2017; Pu et al., 2019; Yusif and Hafeez-Baig, 2016). Old age is described
as multiple health infirmities and conditions that need to be taken care of (Vines et al.,
2015b). Numerous technological interventions are developed to support healthcare and
disability-free living in later life (Cozza et al., 2017; Peruzzini and Germani, 2014).
1
This is a pre-print of an accepted manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction on 12.05.2021, available online: http://www.tandfonline.com/10.1080/10447318.2021.1921365.
2
However, these technologies did not gain a larger momentum in practice due to a
mismatch between the users' real needs and how the technology responds to these
needs, instead treating them simply as frail people (Lee and Coughlin, 2015; Wilkinson
and De Angeli, 2014). Therefore, it is crucial to collect older users' needs early in the
design process and interpret them correctly.
Some researchers have been approaching older adults as users who actively
manage their health and well-being (Carroll et al., 2012; Light et al., 2015; Light et al.,
2016; Suwa et al., 2020; Vines et al., 2015a; Yuan et al., 2018). Acknowledging the
desire for active engagement in later life, some research has investigated the role of
physical activity and social interaction in later life. Physical activity is related to
positive outcomes throughout the lifespan including for older adults. For example,
increased physical activity reduced the risk of depression (Strawbridge et al., 2002),
improved cognitive performance (Colcombe and Kramer, 2003) and improved quality
of life (Sun et al., 2013). Social engagement is another critical factor for older adults'
well-being. Social isolation poses significant risks to older adults mental health,
resulting in loneliness and depression (Cornwell and Waite, 2009). Older people's
perception of active aging has been primarily concerned with physical activity (Stenner
et al., 2011). However, older people report that physical activity is entangled with social
and mental activity, and does not exist in isolation (Gerling et al., 2017; Lazar and
Nguyen, 2017; Litt et al., 2002; Vines et al., 2015a). This illustrates the complexities of
the design space. Aging poses specific challenges to the physical body. However, the
body exists within a social and material environment, which is still unaccounted for by
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) research for older people.
Despite previous studies having addressed acceptance and adoption (Khosla et
al., 2017; Macedo et al., 2017; Pu et al., 2019; Vassli et al., 2018), less is known on
3
designing for older people while ensuring they are engaged from the beginning and
helping them to reason about future possibilities. This paper provides a model of user
requirements for active aging technology generated from two interview studies which
occurred at different phases within our research (described in Section 4). We build on
the model of user desires (De Angeli et al., 2020), which describes intentions to engage
in behaviors in later life as desires for activities as follows: feeling good and doing good
as attitudinal drivers; autonomy and belonging as social drivers; and resilience as a
material driver.
The paper continues as follows. Section 2 introduces the ACANTO research
project. Section 3 describes existing work on user requirements for aging technologies,
gives an overview of the ICT for later life, and presents the model of desires derived
from our initial study that focused on the older adults' preferred activities and the
behavioral drivers to engage in the activities. The model informed the design of 14
scenarios illustrating use of the ACANTO system that are described in Section 4. In
Section 5 we describe and report on the results of a user study (N=21) designed to
evaluate the potential functionality of the ACANTO system by analyzing responses to a
set of personas and scenarios. These scenarios were illustrated in an animation which
illustrated different functions for the ACANTO system. Section 6 presents the derived
model of user requirements. We discuss the results in Section 7 with design
implications for future, more inclusive ICT requirement gathering and research for
active aging. Section 8 concludes the paper.
2. The ACANTO project
The ACANTO project aimed to develop a sociotechnical system to maintain well-being
in later life while facilitating physical activity and social interaction (ACANTO, 2018).
The philosophy behind the ACANTO system design emphasized the need to create a
4
positive experience for older people presenting the system as an opportunity rather than
a necessity. The project had two underlying goals: 1) promoting well-being and health
by encouraging mobility and social interaction, and 2) supporting rehabilitation and
recovery monitoring after a fall. To achieve these goals, the design requires three
technical components – a robotic walker, a social network and a recommender system.
The components work independently or in connection depending on the specific needs
of the user.
The walker, named FriWalk (Friendly Walker), aims to support the self-
management of physical activities by older people, who may require a physical support
to maintain independent mobility or facilitate rehabilitation. In addition, the walker can
monitor of numerous physical attributes, including balance, strength, gait and walking
speed. By acting as an assistant in physical exercises to maintain strength, balance,
flexibility, or endurance, the walker can reduce the risk of falling (Danielsen et al.,
2016). This is a common issue in later life, as each year about a third of older people
that live independently experience a fall (Gillespie et al., 2012).
Prevention is a public health priority in this context as even a minor fall may
require hospitalization. Older adults have a higher risk of mortality resulting from minor
falls (Spaniolas et al., 2010). For those who survive, hospitalization can accelerate
cognitive decline (Wilson et al., 2010). Falls even if not requiring hospitalization are
associated with functional decline, reduced social and physical activities (Tinetti et al.,
1998) and depression (Stel et al., 2004) and many never regain the level of mobility and
confidence they enjoyed before falling (Schutzer and Graves, 2004).
The social network collects a variety of information about the older adults and
creates their profiles. The social network links people with similar backgrounds and/or
interests together. The recommender system uses the profiles to suggest new people to
5
meet, activities to do together and places to visit by matching users based on a variety of
factors, such as shared interests, background, location, and life circumstances. This way
the recommender system can also support awareness of nearby, appropriate
opportunities for activity and socializing. The social network and recommendation
systems are accessed through a tablet which can be used with the walker or
independently (Figure 1). We named the tablet FriTab (Friendly Tablet). These profiles
are adapted as the older adults use the different parts of the ACANTO system and their
mobility is assessed by the walker, they gradually provide information to the social
network, or they rate the different activities they are recommended.
Older adults were involved at the beginning of the design process to help us
understand the activities they like to engage in and how the ACANTO system may
support them. This activity was facilitated by using the Integrated Behavioural Model
(IBM) (Montano and Kasprzyk, 2008), which provided a structured framework and
guided the interview to identify pragmatic as well as hedonic factors that make an
activity desirable for older adults. In previous work, we named these factors as desires
for activities. For example, proximity to people and activities was identified as an
important pragmatic factor (De Angeli et al., 2020).
6
Figure 1. The ACANTO system - the robotic walker (FriWalk) with the mounted
tablet (FriTab).
3. Related Work
This section starts with the existing work concerning older users' requirements for more
inclusive technology. We continue with a literature review challenging mainstream
assumptions of technologies for the older user. Finally, we elaborate on the model of
desires used to drive user requirements elicitation for older user technology.
3.1. Older users' requirements for ICT
Existing research concerning older users’ requirements for technology, either seeks to
validate theoretical models in practice, or are empirical studies of older users of
technology. A number of different theoretical models can be applied to this context. For
example, the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) proposes perceived ease of use and
perceived usefulness as the most influential predictors of technology acceptance (Czaja
et al., 2006; Davis, 1989). The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology
7
(UTAUT) (Venkatesh et al., 2003) combines several theoretical models of acceptance,
including the Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPM) (Ajzen, 1991). According to the
UTAUT, four components predict the intention to use a technology: performance
expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence and facilitating conditions. Research
commonly does not use all constructs within a model, rather it looks at a subset of these.
For example, Barnard et al. (2013) measured the effect of specific UTAUT's constructs
- effort expectancy and facilitating conditions while assuming while assuming that
performance expectancy and social influence constructs are met. However, performance
expectancy and facilitating conditions appeared two most influential factors of older
users’ intention to use technology (Macedo, 2017). Another adaptation of the UTAUT
model is the Almere model (Heerink et al., 2010), which has been used to understand
the acceptance of social robots as a technology that has socially interactive functionality
and in addition to the functional evaluation, it measures factors related to social
interaction with rather than through the technology, enjoyment and trust. The
Domestication Theory (Silverstone and Haddon, 1996) describes the steps that
technology goes through to be accepted in a social setting. An example of this is the role
of video games (De Schutter et al., 2015) where initial excitement was replaced with
moral panic relating to potential to increase violence, to acceptance of benefits that can
be brought and acceptance into society. De Schutter et al. (2015) highlighted that the
meanings older adults attach to games originate from their lived experiences and daily
routines. A similar process could be used to examine the role of social robots in society,
where initial excitement was taken over by fear of non-human interaction for older
adults, but the benefits of such devices are now accepted (De Graaf et al., 2015).
A body of empirical work has identified facilitators and barriers to technology
acceptance. In the interview study (Mitzner et al., 2010) the main reasons older users
8
liked technology were that they provided support for doing activities and convenience
(as making life easier in some way), while the most frequent dislikes were
inconvenience including perceived interruptions, financial expenses and effort, security
and reliability. A similar study, but in the context of mobile devices (Müller et al.,
2015), revealed that the acceptance process could be facilitated by a step-wise
introduction of technology features; understanding the technology language against the
background of older user practice; and social learning process among older users. The
qualitative study described in (Waycott et al., 2016) examined older users' barriers to
participation in a social isolation intervention. The intervention included an IPad
application for creating and sharing photos within a closed social circle comprising a
group of older users and their caregivers. The barriers were grouped as health
conditions and difficulty learning new things (personal reasons), family circumstances
and established social norms (social reasons), and language of use (technological
reasons). Elers et al. (2018) conducted semi-structured interviews with older users and
their informal support networks (friends, neighbors, and family members). The
interviews concerned their needs for technological support to age in place. The
participants expressed the needs for a low-cost technology; ease of use; personalized
and controllable features (what information is collected and shared); and notification of
the support network in case of emergencies or unusual activities such as the absence of
movement in the home during certain hours.
In addition to this theoretical validation work, a stream of studies have
investigated older users' attitudes and preferences towards different technologies, most
recently robotics. This includes a cross-cultural interview study involving older users
and caregivers to collect user requirements for a service robot that provides at-home
assistance (Kleanthous et al., 2016). The study revealed that older users prefer a robot
9
behaving as a friend but that they can control its behavior and one in which the benefits
it brings are very apparent to them. Another research study examined older users' needs
for the GiraffPlus system, an Intelligent Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) technology to
support independence and improve quality of life (QoL) (Cesta et al., 2018). The
GiraffPlus conducted unintrusive data collection (such as blood pressure, body
temperature, movement, and fall), which are then analyzed to alert the caregivers to
emergencies. The respondents highlighted the usefulness of physiological and home
environment monitoring and facilitating social interactions. Amirabdollahian et al.
(2013) investigated older users' perceptions of assistive robots in laboratory settings.
They found that the acceptance of a robot is increased if the robot’s personality
(perceived through their appearance and behavior) matched users’ expectations
concerning a particular task.
A systematic review study identifies salient factors that influence older users’
acceptance of technology (Lee and Coughlin, 2015). The factors cover individual,
social, technological, and delivery aspects of technology acceptance and cover value,
usability, affordability, accessibility, technical support, social support, emotion,
independence, experience, and confidence.
Ensuring that older users are engaged early in the technology design to
anticipate and reason about future roles that technology can acceptably play in their
lives is still not commonplace. The previous theoretical and empirical work focused
either on a specific technology (such as robotic technologies in Cesta et al., 2018,
Heerink et al., 2010, Kleanthous et al., 2016; video games in De Schutter et al., 2015;
and mobile social networking applications in Müller et al., 2015, Waycott et al., 2016)
or ICT in general (Barnard et al., 2013; Elers et al., 2018; Lee and Coughlin, 2015;
Macedo, 2017; Mitzner et al., 2010). In contrast, the ACANTO system is multifaceted,
10
incorporating robotics, social networks, activities and recommender system that
captures different well-being aspects at the same time, addressing both physical and
mental health. This paper contributes a structured methodology to increase and improve
older user involvement, which is necessary to achieve inclusive design that connects
assistance and user experience, according to Farage et al. (2012).
3.2. ICT for older users
Research in computer science has overly focused on the negative effects of aging (Light
et al., 2016; Vines et al., 2015a). Different application contexts have been targeted by a
variety of technological systems, ranging from monitoring systems for fall prevention
using wearable and ambient sensing technology (Danielsen et al., 2016), social robots
for the well-being of people with dementia and mild cognitive impairments (Whelan et
al., 2018) through to games for maintaining user engagement during therapy and
rehabilitation (Uzor and Baillie, 2014). Despite this diversity, most of the systems share
similar requirements. They were designed as assistive technology to compensate for the
age-related decline in motoric, perceptual, and cognitive abilities, which make daily
living activities more difficult for older adults (Cozza et al., 2017; Parra et al., 2014;
Suwa et al., 2020; Yusif and Hafeez-Baig, 2016). A systematic review of ubiquitous
technology designed for older users is provided by Cozza et al. (2017), in addition
Gerling and colleagues (2017) describe 15 systems to facilitate physical exercise in
older age which were published in the HCI literature.
Age-related declines in personal abilities can make daily living tasks more
difficult for older adults (Mitzner et al., 2010). In this respect, robotic technologies have
been widely used to assist older adults in different activities, mainly to support human
physical actions, such as strength, balance, bending and endurance (Pu et al., 2019;
Robinson et al., 2014). A review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled studies
11
showed that these technologies are more effective in prevention than in rehabilitation
(Pu et al., 2019). The review highlighted the contradictory nature of the evidence with
some studies suggesting robots can reduce anxiety and loneliness and improve QoL for
older adults. However, other studies indicated no significant influence on depression
and quality of life. The review found no significant effect of social robots on cognition,
potential for impact on quality of life, improved engagement and social interaction and
had potential to reduce loneliness.
Robotic technologies can be designed to support people living independently by
assisting with mobility, health monitoring, safety, or acting as companions. The former
may be non-social robots, whereas the latter are social robots that have the main goal of
offering companionship (e.g., PARO, the seal robot by McGlynn et al., 2017). Both
types of robots (social and non-social) are nevertheless assistive robots and very little
research has been conducted into designing robotic technology for enhancing the
experiences of older adults. Different studies have investigated how to use robots as
companions (Beer and Takayama, 2011; McGlynn et al., 2017; Orlandini et al., 2016)
or carebots (Suwa et al., 2020) to assist older adults in various physical and social
activities in home settings.
Remote telepresence robots can be useful for healthcare. The Giraff is a
telepresence robot that uses a video interface to allow caregivers and relatives to
virtually visit older people in their homes (Orlandini et al., 2016). The robot was
evaluated in a 42-month longitudinal study, with different demographic groups (Italy,
Spain, Sweden) including older users, family, and doctors. The participants highlighted
the robot's usability and the appropriateness of video interface size, contents and
interactions, and ergonomic features regarding camera position and orientation,
adjustable size, and controllability (such as low light conditions and obstacle detection).
12
One of the challenges with designing healthcare robots is acceptance, as they are
mainly designed to fix a problem rather than fully address user desires that might
prevent decline and promote health (Robinson et al., 2014). On the other hand, robots
may provide users with a way to communicate with friends or family enjoyably
(Orlandini et al., 2016). This way, enhancing their communication experience
outweighs the assistive nature of the technology (Vandemeulebroucke et al., 2018).
While it is essential to identify older users' problems and develop robotic
technologies to solve these problems, much of our use of technology is in the realm of
enhanced experience rather than assistance. Less attention has been given to the
development of robots that support not only physical but social and emotional needs of
older adults (Khosla et al., 2017). The acceptance of these technologies can depend on
how they are presented to the user. If a robot is presented as assistive, it can evoke
stigma (Wu et al., 2014) and thus discourage acceptance. People like to feel
independent, and a robot that conveys their sense of need or disability is likely to be met
with rejection or at least ambivalence. Matilda was a social robot with human attributes
(such as baby-face-like appearance, human voices, gestures, and body movements) that
could recognize voices and faces and perform activities such as playing music, dancing
(as moving patterns), and playing card games. A 4-year study on acceptance of Matilda
by older adults living with dementia (Khosla et al., 2017) revealed increased
engagement with the robot concerning emotions (through reminiscence) and behavior
(through pleasurable activities such as dance and games). Kachouie et al. (2014)
conducted a systematic literature review on socially assistive robots for older adults.
The majority of robots were animal-like, and the studies happened mainly in care
facilities and nursing homes in Japan. They revealed that the robots capable of
13
supporting broader aspects of older people's well-being were more acceptable than
those with limited coverage.
Older adults appreciate supportive technologies generally but often cannot see a
direct need for it in their own life. As elaborated by Cozza et al. (2017), the rejection is
likely generated by a mismatch between the assumptions that have shaped technology
design (focusing on functional aspects) and actual user needs/desires. While it is
important to identify older users' problems and try to meet these needs, attention should
also be paid to how technology can enhance life experiences rather than providing
assistance per se. We need a more in-depth consideration of older adults' needs when
designing the technologies to offer an experience-enhancing function rather than merely
assistance (which connotes disability and dependence).
3.3. The model of user desires
The model of desires for preferred activities (De Angeli et al., 2020) was derived from
an interview study (N=18) performed at the beginning of the ACANTO research, whose
methodology is described in Section 4 and Figure 3. The model was built on IBM that
served as a theoretical foundation for creating the interview proforma. The interviews
aimed to identify the activities preferred by older users and the factors that drove their
intention to engage with those activities as desires. The model of user desires represents
a grounding of IBM in the domain of the preferred activities in later life. The relations
between IBM and the model of desires are illustrated in Figure 2.
IBM identifies the drivers of intention to engage in a given behavior in terms of
the attitudes, perceived norms and personal agency towards that behavior. The attitude
is a person’s predisposition towards a particular behavior, determined by the emotional
responses to undertaking the behavior (experiential), and the beliefs about the behavior's
outcomes (instrumental). The perceived norm reflects the social influence on
14
performing a behavior, based on what others think (injunctive norm) and what others
are doing (descriptive norm). Personal agency consists of perceived control (the degree
to which environmental factors may influence carrying out the behavior) and self-
efficacy (the confidence in one's ability to perform the behavior).
According to the model of desires (Figure 2), preferred activities are influenced
by the desire for resilience as the ability to recuperate fast from difficult situations
(personal agency); the desire for feeling good and doing good (attitudes); the desire for
autonomy and belonging (perceived norms).
Resilience requires resources and competence. Resources highlight a broader
desire of older people to be of use to other people. When supporting their families or
volunteering, they become a resource not only for themselves but for the community.
Competence refers to the accumulated, life-course experience, knowledge and skills, a
unique characteristic of later age for healthy people which older adults desire to pass on
to others.
The attitudes are presented as desires for feeling good and doing good. They are
the most influential factors of behavioral intention. Feeling good concerns pleasurable
physical and mental experiences when engaging in preferred activities. Doing good is
related to instrumental outcomes from performing activities which improve mental and
physical well-being.
Perceived norms are presented as a balance between desires for decisional
autonomy and belonging to social groups. Autonomy indicates the marginal influence of
people who are not closely related to an older person. At the same time, preferred
activities satisfy a desire for belonging, as family and friends exert normative influence
on older people.
15
Injunctive
Descriptive
Family
Friends
Peer group (similar interests,
different age)
Perceived Norm
Intention for active
ageing technology
Desires
Themes
IBM dimensions
Belonging
Autonomy
Figure 2. The model of desires for active aging technology (De Angeli et al., 2020). The
IBM dimensions (left) were used when designing the interviews to elicit older users'
preferred activities, and the factors that influenced the intention to participate in the
activities as desires (right).
Based on the model of desires, we articulate design guidelines as design for
pleasure and design for resilience (De Angeli et al., 2020). Design for pleasure refers to
the need to include aesthetic features in assistive technology. Our previous study (De
Angeli et al., 2020) revealed that pleasure and enjoyment are important motivators for
older people. Elements of aesthetics, sensory experience and feelings define prospective
design spaces for technology in later life. Design for resilience highlights older people
as resources for the community and their competence developed through their lived
experience. That way, the focus of the design moves from the implementation of
assistive technology to the creation of tools that promote pleasure, self-efficacy and
increase the quality of later life (Light et al., 2015; Light et al., 2016; Vines et al.,
2015a; Yuan et al., 2018). It presents an affirmative picture of older adults as
resourceful and resilient, emphasising their knowledge and skills while respecting their
desires.
16
We use this person-centric model of desires to ensure older users are engaged
from the early phase of the design in understanding and reasoning about the future
system.
4. Methodology
The research was organized into four steps, as illustrated in Figure 3. Phase 1 used the
IBM model as a framework to identify the activities preferred by older adults and the
elements that affect their intention to engage with those activities as desires (De Angeli
et al., 2020). This phase resulted in the model of user desires (described in Figure 2
from section 3.3). Phase 2 created a set of user scenarios in which the ACANTO system
was presented as supporting the different preferred activities. Phase 3 evaluated the
scenarios concerning the model of user desires. The model served as a tool to
operationalize interviews to elicit user requirements (the questions are reported in the
Appendix). Phase 4 developed the study's findings into a derived model that describes
user requirements for active aging technology. This paper describes the work from
Phases 2-4, from which we derive the model of user requirements.
The research was approved by the Ethics Committee for the experimentation with
human beings at the University of Trento (Italy) and the University of Northumbria in
Newcastle (UK).
Figure 3. Structured research methodology for user requirements elicitation.
17
The principal way in which the ACANTO system facilitates well-being is to
suggest activities and support the user to take part in them. Collecting information about
interests, background and previously enjoyed activities from the users was crucial to the
formulation of recommendations. Frequently reported activities from Phase 1,
previously reported in De Angeli et al. (2020) included physical activity (e.g., walking),
volunteering, hobbies (e.g., shopping, lifelong learning, museums) and socializing (e.g.,
visiting friends or family). The next step was to investigate the role of ACANTO system
should play in planning and/or performing future activities. We adopted a scenario-
based requirements approach for data collection (Sutcliffe, 2003) to contextualize
different aspects of living with and using the ACANTO system, combining physical and
social elements. We designed a set of 14 scenarios to demonstrate different ways the
system can be used to support the particular activities extracted from the previous study.
A scenario is designed as a hypothesized story describing typical users undertaking their
preferred activities (Preece et al., 2015) with the help of the ACANTO system. The
system assumes two distinct contexts of use – for older adults living independently,
without medical supervision, to increase their daily activities within a living
environment, and in a hospital or care facility under medical supervision. Accordingly,
we have two groups of scenarios – well-being and rehabilitation. Each scenario is
centered around a persona and an activity. We considered natural changes in health and
functional capacities that may appear in later life in creating the set of personas. We
included social, economic, and environmental factors that may affect participation in the
activities. The resulting set contained personas with different socio-economic statuses
and a range of functional capacities, including healthy older adults and others who
experienced a decline and wished to regain the desired health and mobility level. Table
1 summarizes each persona's demographics, health, and lifestyle.
18
The scenarios use desires and related themes to represent the factors that may
influence the intention to engage in the activities. These scenarios present a range of
hedonistic activities (e.g., socializing and learning) from which users may derive
pleasure and satisfaction through to practical activities (e.g., exercises) from which user
derive instrumental benefits (e.g., mobility and autonomy). Table 2 describes the
scenarios in terms of personas, activities, user desires, and the ACANTO system
components used (FriWalk and FriTab). In addition to the model of user desires, we
introduced additional categories within the perceived norms construct to examine the
influence they may have on user intention as professionals (injunctive influence) and
peers (descriptive influence).
The scenario structure is organized into four main parts:
• information about the existing activity (lifestyle and gap for activity);
• information on how the activity might be enhanced (desire for activity);
• an example of how the ACANTO system can support the enhancement (arrival of
the system, the activity recommendation, and support for the activity execution);
and
• the user's response to the recommendation and the expected outcome of using the
ACANTO system (result).
Each scenario starts with a brief description of the persona, including
demographic information, location, and lifestyle (Table 1). It continues with a
description of the persona’s need for the activity. Then the scenario shows how the
persona acquires the ACANTO system. For example, by approaching the persona
directly or from the people (s)he knows. The persona starts using the FriTab to provide
personal data (e.g., location, background, or preferences for activities) or to search for
activities or people of interest. Based on the input, the persona is informed about an
19
opportunity for the activity. Following the FriTab's recommendation, the persona
decides whether to accept it. Depending on the persona and the activity, the
recommendation can be implemented with or without the FriWalk (i.e., robotic walker)
support. The scenario concludes with doing the activity and a description of the benefits
derived.
Each scenario involves a different persona (Table 1). Tom (Scenario 1)
volunteers in a museum, tries out the FriTab that suggests people interested in natural
history, and organizes a guided tour with the ACANTO system's help. George (2) uses
the FriTab, which offers him an acting group to join and work with various-age
members. Anthony (3) is introduced to the FriTab that suggests new people to meet
according to their shared background based on the data he entered. Isabella (4) is
presented with the ACANTO system at the shopping mall; the system recommends and
guides her to her preferred shops. Sarah (5) receives the FriTab that suggests attending
the University of the Third Age (U3A) together with a friend (she accepts and visits).
Michael (6) was given the ACANTO system that recommends and assists in a guided
museum tour that he attends. Isabel (7) receives the ACANTO system that suggests and
supports meeting a new person with shared interests (walking) with whom she spends
time. Fatima (8) uses the ACANTO system in moving around; the system detects a
mobility issue and recommends a doctor visit that she carries out. Dorothy (9) is
introduced to the ACANTO system that suggests her going out and helps her moving
around. Scenarios 10-14 describe personas with different life circumstances who wish
to regain mobility after experiencing a functional decline (due to impaired eyesight or
fall) - the ACANTO system assists in walking through rehabilitation or moving outside.
Table 2 describes the scenarios concerning user desires, indicating personas, activities,
and ACANTO system components (FriWalk and FriTab).
20
For our study, we implemented the scenarios as animated storyboards by
following the guidelines in terms of the level of detail, the amount of text, the presence
of people and emotions, and the length, as suggested in (Truong et al., 2006). The mean
duration of the scenarios is 93 seconds (Max 115 seconds, Min 61 seconds). Figure 4
illustrates the storyboard excerpts from the scenarios, whereas thorough video
descriptions of the recorded scenarios as animated storyboards can be found elsewhere
2
.
2
Recorded video descriptions of the scenarios as animated storyboards: http://bit.ly/2sCGEVd
21
Table 1. Personas described in terms of demographics, location and lifestyle. Taken
from McNeill et al. (2017), p. 12.
No. Description of persona
1 Tom is a 68-year-old man who lives with his wife. Tom lives in Byker, Newcastle. Tom has
quite an active social life and enjoys meeting new people.
2 George is an 81-year-old man who lives alone. He lives in Newcastle. George is quite active
and enjoys helping others.
3 Anthony is a 75-year-old man who lives alone. He lives in sheltered housing near Gateshead
town center. He lives a quiet life and doesn’t get out much. Two or three times a week he
walks to the local superstore to buy groceries.
4 Isabella is an 89-year-old woman who lives alone. She lives in Newcastle City Center. She is
not as active as she used to be because her eyesight is getting worse and she worries about
losing her way.
5 Sarah is a 72-year-old woman who lives with her husband. She lives in a small house in
Corbridge. Sarah enjoys living in the rural community and has a small number of friends who
live nearby.
6 Michael is a 72-year-old man who lives alone. Michael lives in Felling, Gateshead. For the
past few years, he has found mobility very difficult and he is waiting for a hip operation.
Consequently, he doesn’t get out much.
7 Isabel is an 82-year-old woman who has lived alone for the past two years. She lives in a flat
by herself in Newcastle. She no longer goes out very often and has become very physically
inactive. Her daughter brings her groceries once a week.
8 Fatima is a 73-year-old lady who lives with her husband. She lives in Hexham. She is
reasonably active and enjoys using her walker to help her get around.
9 Dorothy is a 69-year-old woman who lives alone. She lives in Blaydon. Dorothy uses a walker
to get around because she finds that it gives her confidence after her fall one year ago.
10 Manuel is a 74-year-old man who lives alone. He lives in an apartment in Madrid. He recently
suffered a bad fall which has made it difficult for him to get around. He is undergoing therapy
at a local falls clinic and is slowly getting better.
11 Manuela is an 83-year-old woman who lives with her husband in a nursing home in Getafe,
Madrid. She has lost some sight during the last years, and she does not know her way around
the new neighbourhood or the venues and activities there.
12 Jose is an 80-year-old man who lives alone. He lives in a small, old flat in Getafe, Madrid.
José was quite active before the fracture, and enjoyed going in the morning to a bar near his
house with his friends.
13 David is a 75-year-old man who has recovered from a fracture and currently he is able to walk
assisted by a normal walker.
14 Ana is a 76-year-old woman who has some blood pressure problems. She lives in a nursing
home and needs a crutch to walk after a fall.
Table 2. Descriptions of the scenarios concerning personas, activities, desires, and related themes to introduce the factors that may influence the intention to
engage in the activities and ACANTO system features. +/- denotes the presence/absence of the specific theme in a scenario. When used in the Belonging
theme (age columns), +/- indicates the presence/absence of age groups different than that of a persona (as ≠) or age peers (as =). Time discussed is the number
of times a scenario was chosen and discussed by the participants.
No. Persona Activity Attitude Norm as a balance between belonging and autonomy Personal agency System
feature used
Times
discussed
Resilience
Feeling good Doing good Autonomy Belonging Resources Competence
mental
satisfaction
physical
pleasure
mental
well-being
physical
well-being
friends professionals interest age
= ≠
1 Tom volunteering in
a museum
+ − + − − − + + + + + FriTab 10
2 George volunteering in
an acting group
+ − + − − − + + + + + FriTab 9
3 Anthony spending time
with others
+ − + − − − + + − + + FriTab 7
4 Isabella exploring
shopping mall
+ − + − − + − − − − − FriTab,
FriWalk
6
5 Sarah attending U3A + − + − + + + + − − − FriTab 4
6 Michael visiting museum + − + − − + + + + − − FriTab,
FriWalk
4
7 Isabel walking + + + + − − + + − − − FriTab,
FriWalk
3
8 Fatima shopping + − + − − + − − − + + FriTab,
FriWalk
3
9 Dorothy shopping + − + − + + − + − + − FriTab,
FriWalk
3
10 Manuel visiting museum + − + − + − − − − − − FriTab,
FriWalk
3
11 Manuela rehabilitation
exercise
+ + + + − + + + − − − FriTab,
FriWalk
2
12 Jose rehabilitation
exercise
− + − + − + − − − − − FriTab,
FriWalk
2
13 David visiting museum + + + + − − − − − − − FriTab,
FriWalk
1
14 Ana rehabilitation
exercise
− + − + − + − − − − − FriTab,
FriWalk
0
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Storyboards' excerpts of the scenarios: (a) Scenario 2 – George using FriTab
to meet new people; (b) Scenario 4 - Isabella using FriTab and FriWalk to navigate in
a shopping center.
24
5. System scenarios evaluation
The model of desires guided the design of an interview study to examine the factors that
affected older adults’ intention to use the ACANTO system to undertake their preferred
activities, as described in the scenarios.
The study was organized as semi-structured interviews with 21 participants.
They were from Newcastle, UK (11 females, 10 males; age range 60-89, mean = 74,
standard deviation = 8). The sample was recruited from the NorthEast Age Database at
Northumbria University. It contained people from an urban area, living independently at
home, and did not suffer any severe health issues. Around 14% of the Newcastle’s
population were over 65 years, expected to increase to 44% by 2039 (Well-being for
life, 2017). The aging index (the number of older adults per 100 persons younger than
15 years old as from Preedy, 2010) based on 2011 census data is approximately 81%
(Nomis, 2017). The participants had experience with smartphones or tablets for emails,
messaging, and online applications (such as public services, booking, social networks,
and media content). Our previous study (De Angeli et al., 2020) engaged N=18
independently-living users from the UK (8) and Italy (10). The participants recruited for
this study were different persons than those recruited in the previous one, but had
similar technology experience and health (as above).
The interview was pilot tested with 1 participant. The pilot interview led to the
refinement of the initial questions and the coding scheme (derived from the model of
user desires described in Table 3). The final interview questions are reported in the
Appendix. The interviews lasted 50 minutes on average. A male researcher ran all the
interviews. The participants were interviewed at the PaCT Lab, Northumbria
University.
25
5.1. Procedure
At the beginning of each interview, participants were briefed about the
ACANTO system, its main components, and their purpose. At this stage, we described
the FriWalk and FriTab components, their functions, and how they could be used
without going into detail about the technology or scenarios. When describing the
components (and creating narratives of the scenarios' animated storyboards), we did not
use technical language but terms that the participants could understand.
The study's aim was described to the participants as collecting information on
people’s intentions to use the system, participants were provided with information about
the procedure, including recording for analysis and how their anonymity would be
maintained. They were then invited to sign a consent form.
The interview started with the questions regarding the participant's lifestyle to
understand the personal context. The participants were presented with cards that
describe the personas from Table 1. They were asked to choose up to 4 personas they
most identified with or that were similar to someone they knew well. By choosing
personas similar to themselves or other people they knew, the participants were best
placed to determine the personas' intentions to use the ACANTO system or their
anticipated experiences of using it. The majority of the participants chose 2 (N=8) or 3
personas (N=8), 4 participants chose 4 personas and 1 participant chose 1 persona.
For each persona, participants watched the associated animated storyboard of the
scenario once. All storyboards are available from http://bit.ly/2sCGEVd. Then the
animated storyboard was repeated and paused at two specific points. Firstly, after
introducing the persona, the researcher asked the participant about the facilitators and
barriers associated with the persona that influence the use of ACANTO system (i.e.,
FriTab and/or FriWalk used in the particular scenario). Secondly, after demonstrating
the ACANTO system's role, they were asked to elaborate on the persona reasons for use
26
of the system. These questions concerned what is it about the scenario that would make
the persona feel good (experiential attitude), what might the persona gain (instrumental
attitude) or be able to do (doing good), how would other peoples views about or use of
the system affect their behavior, did the system promote autonomy and belonging
(normative influences), build resources and facilitate competence (agency).
5.2. Analysis
We audio-recorded and transcribed the interviews. The participants were anonymized
by a string of letters and numbers (participant number and sex) and number (age). The
transcripts were processed using deductive thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2006).
The analysis was conducted by identifying and discussing all the statements relevant to
the coding scheme. It was supported by the Atlas.ti software. Four code families were
derived from the model of user desires (Figure 2). In particular, three corresponded to
the original dimensions of the IBM (attitudes, norms, and agency) and their respective
themes as from the model, one related to barriers. Each code family (as from IBM) was
further classified into desire-specific codes, as reported in Table 3. Two independent
analyses were carried out, one in Italy one in the UK in parallel to ensure agreement
with the coding. They confirmed that the data was complete, and there were no
disagreements (with the inter-rater reliability of 85%). The analyses of the transcripts
against the codes discovered the themes presented in Table 3.
5.3. Results
The last column in Table 2 shows how many times each persona (scenario) was chosen
and discussed with the participants. As participants could choose more than once, 57
scenario discussions were completed in total. Participants tended to identify with the
more active persona scenarios. Tom was the most popular - showing an engaging
27
person who likes meeting new people and helping others. 10 out of 21 participants
chose this persona scenario which involved personal involvement in diverse
volunteering activities. They perceived the system to enable them to meet new people to
socialize with or help. The most discussed scenario using the FriWalk is Isabella, a
generally healthy woman but experiences sight issues. Visual capability typically
decreases as people age. 6 out of 21 participants who identified with Isabella also faced
an eyesight issue. They considered the system would support normal functioning with
this condition. The main problems due to the eyesight included loss of confidence in
going out, difficulty using public transportation, and finding items in shops. The
participants who selected rehabilitation scenarios did so from the perspective of a friend
or family member. These participants typically had mobility problems or were not
active themselves.
Table 3. Themes from the evaluation of the ACANTO system scenarios, with the
number of times the theme occurred in participants' responses and summative values for
codes and code families.
Code family Codes Theme Count Total
Attitudes Experiential (Feeling good) mental satisfaction 29 47 121
physical pleasure 18
Instrumental (Doing good) socializing 48 74
volunteering 13
utility 13
Norms Injunctive (Significant others) family 18 39 77
friends 12
professionals 9
Descriptive (Reference group) similar others (mixed age) 38 38
Agency Perceived control (Resources) ergonomics 12 36 144
reliability 10
function quality 8
availability 6
Self-efficacy (Competence) usability 77 108
mobility 20
benefits 11
Barriers health 20 35
cost 10
learning effort 5
In this section, we now present our findings according to the coding scheme,
describe themes that emerged from the data, and illustrate them with excerpts from the
28
interviews. Each quote is identified with the letter initials of the participant, sex, age,
and name of the persona/scenario. The number of occurrences of the particular theme in
participants' responses is given in parentheses, and the same values are reported in
Table 3 (Count column).
5.3.1. Agency
Ergonomic design (12 occurrences) showed a major influence on the users’ self-
perception of being resourceful. It was elaborated in terms of adjustable size (to prevent
slouching), grips (handbrake sensitivity), transportability, ease of manoeuvre (slim) and
using non-embarrassing signals.
Other relevant factors include reliability (e.g., braking system) (10), the function quality
(8) described as the accuracy of activity recommendation in providing relevant
information (e.g., cost, weather, accessibility, and transportation options) and
appropriate matching when recommending, and availability of technology to older users
(6).
The participants' competence to use the system (self-efficacy) was discussed
concerning the three main themes - usability, mobility, and benefits.
Firstly, it concerned usability. Participants frequently reported that the simpler
and easier to use the system is, the more likely people are to feel competent using it (77
occurrences):
I would try everything you wanted me to [on the system] out of curiosity but to
keep doing after that it would have to be fairly easy to use. If it wasn't [fairly easy
to use] then I would lose interest in it because I would be doing something that
until I knew how it worked and what it did, I wasn't interested in. [P1M70-Sarah]
Instructions and explanations were the main factors of contributing to a sense of
competence (20). These were mentioned as initial assistance/education about the
29
system, step-by-step instructions, peer help, manuals and handbooks. The technology's
language should be understandable, using clearly-worded instructions (10). When asked
about being in control of the system, a participant explained:
Your technical language would make me struggle. I wouldn't understand it. I assess
lay summaries sometimes and I look at what they have written and I say to them,
"Is this a lay summary for someone like me or is it a technical summary for your
professor and that?" [P2F72-George]
Secondly, the system was perceived as a means to facilitate competence
concerning one's mobility (e.g., going out and getting around) (20):
I think that [using the Friwalk] would be really handy for me, just a little - but not
drag me like, because I have floppy ankles, so I have to make sure I pick my feet
up. [P3F78-Dorothy]
Thirdly, the benefits of using the system need to be evident for older adults to
increase their sense of competence (11). It may be challenging to get older people to use
technology for the first time. Still, the participants highlighted that if the advantages of
using it are apparent, they will be more inclined to invest in learning and overcoming
obstacles to usage. While describing his confidence in using the system, a participant
commented:
I think it [running a computer] depends on the way that it’s done, but if you can
show people the benefit then they’re generally willing to invest the work involved
in understanding the system. [P4F71-George]
Nevertheless, positive comments towards the agency assume that a user should
not depend too much on the system. For example, feeling a loss of autonomy or being
“nannied” as if the system steered them around. Participants elaborated on specific
needs for such a system concerning aging (e.g., fear of falling, lack of motivation, and
30
confidence to be physically active). Relatedly, participants elaborated on specific
resources such as having a seat on which they could rest and a basket to carry items
(e.g., when shopping). This way, they may walk where they want without worrying
about getting tired.
While some participants expressed this fear of stigma from the FriWalk, they
also felt positive about it. For example, being an alternative better than a wheelchair
since the user would be at the same height as other people, thereby interacting better. Or
re-framing it as an enabling device that raises their competence:
I know that some people might initially feel a bit embarrassed that they look like
they had a tripod walker but if people all sort of look and they say, “This is my
satnav,” then you think, “Oh it’s street cred, satnav, how does that work?” This is
what you do with it and it makes you feel worthy because you’re actually telling
somebody who’s probably a lot younger than you how this works. So that’s a street
cred thing. [P5F69-Isabel]
Regarding barriers to the intention to use the system that affected agency, the
participants elaborated on health and mobility issues (20) that included limited eyesight,
walking uphill/downhill, hip and knee problems, and fear of falling. Furthermore, they
highlighted they expected the system to be costly (10) and they had difficulty learning
new things (5).
5.3.2. Attitudes
Findings on experiential attitudes (feeling good) show consistent entanglement of
physical and mental experiences from the participants’ narratives. Participants
highlighted that the system would provide mental satisfaction (29 occurrences). In
particular, they associated altruistic scenarios with feelings of enjoyment and
achievement from helping others and recruiting new people to volunteer. The specific
31
feelings reported by the participants were a sense of social involvement and belonging
to a peer group (16), a sense of fulfilling life (5), a sense of achievement (4), and a
feeling of independence (4). Physical pleasure was described as the feeling of relaxation
(10) and physical well-being (8), such as feeling good or staying fit. For example, a
participant raised that if the system is easy enough to learn, this will provide a feeling of
“mastery”, a psychological need connected to subjective well-being (Tay and Diener,
2011):
I think for a start once they’d mastered the fact that they could actually use the
FriTab or tablet or whatever, that would make them chuffed to bits, because I know
how I feel when I can’t [do a] slight thing now, you know. But again knowing that
they could [learn it], it improves you both socially, mentally and physically when
you get out and about from your usual boring day-to-day routine. [P6F69-Anthony]
In addition, expanding social circles by meeting people with similar interests or
backgrounds through shared activities was seen as the primary doing good for
themselves that the system may enable (33). Frequently mentioned activities were
walking, social drink and food, a theatre visit, and shopping. The participants spoke
about feeling connected by maintaining contacts with existing friends and family,
creating new relationships depending on location and interests, and connecting with
people they used to work with.
It [system] would make them feel as though they weren’t alone in the world. I
mean he doesn’t sort of say it in those terms but you can feel where’s the world
gone, you know, we’re stuck out here. Obviously they know their next door
neighbour either side but that’s about it because nobody ever goes out anywhere.
[P7M81-Sarah]
Helping other people emerged as an altruistic opportunity that the system may
provide as doing good for others (13). The participants associated the volunteering
32
scenarios with different kinds of such activities from their lives. These included charity
work, teaching a language group, helping people with disabilities with their legal rights,
organising group sessions for people with eyesight problems, local community work,
tutoring at the U3A, and planning get-togethers. A participant elaborated on engaging
younger people in volunteering activities:
[...] so that [the system] would be great to fill the days [...] I volunteer for Age UK
on the IT side [...] And on a Wednesday afternoon I go to one of the schools and do
it there with sixth form pupils as a mentor. And they in turn work with the senior
citizens, so it’s the two-way street. [P1M70-Tom]
Connecting to people with similar health conditions as a benefit emerged in the
rehabilitation scenarios (15).
Finally, participants highlighted the system's utility concerning doing good. In
particular, helping them to get desired information related to the activities, including
shopping (sales), transportation arrangements (bus stops and times), public services, and
navigation in public spaces, including museums and shopping centers (13). A
participant reflected on finding co-located shops and places to eat:
[...] Could be nice not just shopping, but somewhere to eat. You know, I think that
might be something you wouldn’t know. So if it could direct you to the kind of
food you want, that would be even better than the shops. [P8M78-Dorothy]
A barrier concerning attitudes was the feeling of being “past it”. A participant
mentioned his friends might say that they do not want to use technology, or to get more
socially involved and may need more encouragement to go out.
5.3.3. Norms
Regarding significant others, the participants reported that they would likely use the
system if encouraged by family members (18 occurrences) including a spouse, children,
33
other close relatives and friends (12) whom they described as people they knew well
and whom they trusted.
In addition participants highlighted a role for two different types of professionals.
Firstly they suggested they would follow a recommendation provided by healthcare
staff (4). Finally, their intention to use was influenced by the availability of a
technology expert to adequately informed them about how to use it (5).
These last two groups illustrate the different types of people who may encourage
an older adult to use system. In addition, participants also highlighted the influence of
the descriptive (reference group). This includes people with similar age, health or
background, or similar interests regardless of age. In this respect, the participants
mentioned that they would use the system if they saw people similar to themselves
using it (38). The system was recognized as a tool that can link people with similar
health conditions (rehabilitation scenarios) or shared interests and background (well-
being scenarios) together, that people may aspire to use to be part of the group and feel
they were missing out if they too did not have one. However, the participants would
only be encouraged to use the system as if other people communicated positive
experiences of using it:
It’s like all of these. Things like Facebook. If you think, “Why is Facebook so
popular?” It’s because people started using it, and found that they couldn’t
communicate with their group of friends unless they were on this thing. There was
a sense of missing out. So I think you need that sort of impetus into the start of the
system. [P9M71-George]
In addition to people similar to themselves, participants also mentioned a desire
to engage in intergenerational contact around volunteering scenarios, as illustrated in
the quote [P1M70-Tom] about volunteering. The George persona, an older man helping
34
young people in an acting group, was the second most discussed persona. However,
intergenerational contact depends on the type of activity:
I would have thought that possibly an age limit may be useful, but not necessarily
because I guess with a thing like that scenario I guess it’s the subject [acting] rather
than the people [...] for this subject it probably wouldn’t matter but there may be
other things where you possibly wouldn’t want to be meeting with a 20-year-old
versus an older person. For various reasons. [P10F84-Tom]
6. Model of user requirements
We aggregated recurring themes from the data and collated them into the model of user
requirements for active aging technology (Figure 5). The instrument for our analysis
was the IBM-based model of older user desires (De Angeli et al., 2020). This model
builds on the generic factors provided in IBM by providing concrete factors which
specifically motivate older people to engage with technology to maintain an active
lifestyle. It makes a shift from a perspective that connects later life with decline and
frailty. Rather, it supports older users as people with not only physical needs to
accommodate but with desires for pleasure and to give back to the community. This
requires an inclusive approach to improve later life quality. As such agency was the
dominant construct discussed as influencing behavioral intention (144 occurrences)
followed by attitudes (121) and norms (77), as summarized in Table 3.
35
Figure 5. User requirements for active aging technology through the lens of the
model of desires.
6.1. Agency
Personal agency consists of perceived control over the environment or tool and
self-efficacy or confidence in ones ability. This requires resources and competence
which participants relate to the technological properties. In particular, resources as a
function of ergonomics, reliability, function quality and availability.
Participants highlighted some specific ergonomic design elements for robotic
walkers (such as size, grips, controllability) that must consider natural physical and
mental functioning changes as people age. Reliability as the system's quality was
concerned with the walker-related aspects, while function quality was mainly referred to
application aspects (i.e., recommender system).
Competence was facilitated by expectations of usability, mobility and benefits
from using technology. Usability linked to participants' competence in using the system.
36
It was the most frequently referred to as ease of use, older-friendly instructions and
support for learning, and clearly-worded language of use. The technology that facilitates
mobility such as leaving home and spending time raises older adults' perception of their
competency. Finally, the benefits of using technology in relation to achieving their
personal goals must be apparent for older users.
6.2. Attitudes
Older adults’ intentions are justified for the sake of feeling good and doing good.
Findings on doing good indicate the entanglement of physical pleasure and mental
satisfaction throughout the scenarios. Mental satisfaction came out from feelings of
enjoyment, including connectedness, fulfillment, achievement and independence. At the
same time, the physical pleasure was described as feeling good and relaxed.
The doing good resulting from technology use were socializing, characterized by
interests, health and age groups; volunteering - helping others as a service/opportunity
that technology enables, and utility as the system's usefulness in supporting preferred
activities.
An important contribution of this study is identifying volunteering as a
prominent activity among older people. It is perceived as an opportunity to provide
support to older and younger people, and to the community in general. Volunteering
allows older adults to use their knowledge and skills to demonstrate competence. The
volunteering behavior of older adults is connected with higher levels of well-being
(Anderson et al., 2009), positive health outcomes (Kim and Konrath, 2016; Varma et
al., 2016), and decreased use of health and care services (Kim and Konrath, 2016).
6.3. Norms
Our findings are consistent with the previous work, where descriptive norms were
37
perceived as more influential than injunctive norms (De Angeli et al., 2020). The
structure of social influence is described with the specific networks of users. Family and
friends had the major injunctive influence (as significant others), while the influence of
professionals quoted as healthcare staff and technology experts was very moderate.
Descriptive norms were characterized as positive reference group experiences
defined as similar others concerning interests and hobbies (involving different age
groups), background, and health. Linking up with people recovering from similar health
issues for support and encouragement was common to rehabilitation scenarios.
Lastly, the main barriers that interfere with older adults’ intentions are health
issues, technology costs, and difficulties in learning new things.
7. Discussion
The presented model is descriptive, proposing dimensions (as model's factors) to be
taken into account when investigating user requirements rather than focusing on user
requirements per se. Considering that user requirements are specific to a particular
technological system, we suggest general dimensions in which concrete user
requirements can be instantiated and categorized instead of collecting them ad hoc. The
relevance of the dimensions can vary based on the technology for the older user. That
said, the purpose of our work is a comprehensive model for eliciting user requirements.
In this sense, user requirements are a means for validating the proposed model.
7.1. User requirements implications
When people reach a certain age, psychologically and physically, they are content to
keep things going rather than changing. Overcoming this remains a challenge. Granted
that there are difficulties for older adults using technology by virtue of their age, a
solution may be to target people before they reach that stage or design technology as
38
age-friendly as possible. Our results add to existing critics of design for active aging
(Vines et al., 2015a) and show that older adults’ motivations for using technology
cannot be easily discriminated from that of younger people.
7.1.1. Implications for user requirements of agency
The technology acceptance models' usability (TAM's perceived ease of use and
UTAUT's effort expectancy), as a critical factor of technology use (Barnard et al.,
2013), relates to the agency, enhancing older users' competence and themselves as
resources for society. The usability is a common theme in empirical studies often
referred to as old age-friendly language of use (Müller et al., 2015; Waycott et al., 2016)
and optimized learning effort (Elers et al., 2018; Lee and Coughlin, 2015; Mitzner et al.,
2010; Vassli and Farshchian, 2018). Moreover, applying the Domestication Theory to
technology brings a social element to the evaluation. It provides space to explore the
acceptance of the technology at large and ask questions as to whether people are in the
stage of initial excitement and high expectations which may not be met, are they fearful
of what it might mean for society and the unintended negative consequences of
adoption, or are we at the stage of acceptance where the technology is the norm and
accepted part of our everyday lives. In our study we can see participants had high
expectations of a robotic walker intervention, but they still feared that it would not be
able to support meaningful activities and interests in their lives. Negative perceptions
about function quality are often mentioned concerning personalized (system-driven) and
customizable (user-driven) features of technology (Elers et al., 2018). The common
requirements of a cross-cultural sample of older adults for using domestic service robots
(Kleanthous et al., 2016) resonates with resources (function quality and ergonomics)
and competence (apparent benefits). The cross-cultural, longitudinal study on the Giraff
telepresence robot's use showed that the UI's usability and robot's ergonomics were the
39
most influential factors for their acceptance (Orlandini et al., 2016).
Respecting older users' choices and acknowledging their perceptions and life
experiences in technology design is critical for acceptance (Kachouie et al., 2014). The
sociotechnical perspective on technology design advocates for involving older users not
as problems to be fixed but emphasizing their knowledge and skills (Giaccardi et al.,
2016; Manzini, 2015). Consequently, older adults show a disposition towards
technology that supports doing preferred activities (Mitzner et al., 2010; Vassli and
Farshchian, 2018; Yuan et al., 2018). The robotic walker is a critical part of our
intervention but it may evoke stigma which raises users fears about the technology.
Older adults often avoid using a walker or similar assistive devices because of the fear
that they will be labeled as old or disabled, showing other people something is wrong
with them or feeling they are letting themselves down (Zwijsen et al., 2011). The most
preferred well-being scenarios by healthy participants (Table 1 and 2) show that walker
technologies are not stigmatic per se, but may provide opportunities for doing activities
and positive user experience. The prevalence of agency influencing behavioral intention
indicates that assistive technologies can be designed to create and maintain a positive
self-image. According to Lee and Coughlin (2015), older adults favor technology that
helps them remain independent in other people's eyes (or gives them competence).
Next, they pose that such technology should bring forward their knowledge and skills
(or being a resource that can fit existing and evolving needs). Finally, they highlight that
it should not assume any sign of aging or decline (thereby facilitating resilience).
Our findings complement these results by revealing and systematizing specific,
technology-related factors that can encourage older adults as resources for society and
to build their competence to ensure that the technology becomes acceptable to
individuals and accepted by society.
40
7.1.2. Implications for user requirements of attitudes
Attitudes refer to values older people would expect to gain from technology supporting
their activities as experiential (feeling good) and instrumental (doing good).
Accordingly, Lee and Coughlin (2015) emphasize positive emotional experience and
practical values older people see (as useful) for successful technology use.
The technology acceptance models' utility (TAM's perceived usefulness and
UTAUT's performance expectancy), being a significant predictor of technology use
(Macedo, 2017), reflects the instrumental attitudes, facilitating doing good for
themselves and others.
In addition to helping manage their health, older adults expect assistive
technologies to support different aspects of well-being and to increase their pleasure and
satisfaction (Kachouie et al., 2014). Doing good appears in the Almere model (as
perceived enjoyment and social presence in Heerink et al., 2010) concerning
expectations from similar technology. For example, older adults like social robots that
can participate in pleasurable activities, such as dancing, listening to music, and playing
games (Khosla et al., 2017).
When considering assisted living robotic technologies for well-being, a
significant predictor of their use was perceived utility in facilitating health self-
monitoring and interactions with known people (Cesta et al., 2018), alerting the support
network in emergencies (Elers et al., 2018), or meeting users' expectations regarding
concrete tasks (Amirabdollahian et al., 2013). In our results, performance expectancy
(Vassli and Farshchian, 2018) resonates with doing good including socializing
characterized by interests, health and age groups, and perceived control or self-
management of well-being. The preference for volunteering scenarios shows that this
activity can be a powerful behavioral driver for older adults from doing good.
41
7.1.3. Implications for user requirements of norms
The requirements of perceived norms structure social influence as the factor of
technology acceptance (Venkatesh et al., 2003). Lee and Coughlin (2015) aggregate
previous research and classify relevant social influencers as family, peers, and
community. Similarly, Vassli and Farshchian (2018) describe significant social
influence as peers, family, doctors, and service providers. Along with these groups,
younger relatives influenced digital gameplay initiation (De Schutter et al., 2015). Next,
similar others' influence as a descriptive reference group is aligned with social learning
among peers (Müller et al., 2015). Conversely, Waycott et al. (2016) highlight family
circumstances (such as providing care for family members) and existing social norms
(e.g., attitudes of family members) as potential barriers for older adults' technology use.
We organize the social factors based on the categories and their influence on
older adults - significant others having a descriptive role, and similar others (or
reference group) playing a normative role. We extend the reference (peer) group as not
only based on age or health but shared interests and hobbies independent of age. These
findings suggest new trajectories in technology design, such as facilitating
intergenerational activities or volunteering.
The salient barriers to using technology for doing their activities correspond
with the older adults’ reasons for non-use of the technology reported by Waycott et al.
(2016) regarding health problems and learning effort. The inconvenience caused by the
technology's monetary cost (e.g., professional photo camera or robot) or increased effort
to master it corresponds with the results from the integrated model of technology
adoption (Lee and Coughlin, 2015) and interview studies (Elers et al., 2018; Mitzner et
al., 2010).
42
7.2. Design implications
The results of our study frame a mixture of physical, mental and social attributes of
“successful” aging (Vines et al., 2015a) into a more coherent set of dimensions to
explore, create and categorize user requirements for a specific inclusive technology for
later life.
Our analysis reveals a complex picture of factors influencing older user intention
to use active aging technologies to support their desired activities. In this respect, the
requirements can act as a set of design goals, and highlight features that can be used in
the design to provide more than satisfying needs, but an enjoyable and desirable
experience. In addition, barriers can be reduced by highlighting the benefits which can
counteract focus on dislikes and costs. This focus on benefits can encourage uses to
expend effort in overcoming the barriers. This approach can improve acceptance of
older-friendly technologies that provide mental, physical, and social benefits.
7.2.1. Design for resilience
The requirements for resources and competence reveal the desired qualities of a
technology (Figure 5) that support user agency as the resilience to the specific
circumstances of later life caused by aging's natural process. There is a tendency in
societies and older people to live independently in their homes and decrease the burden
on healthcare (Pu et al., 2019). In that sense, building on these requirements can
facilitate self-management of health as part of daily routines, and more importantly,
narrow a gap between well-being and health.
Design for resilience emphasizes older users' roles as resources for the
community and their competence from learned knowledge and skills from a lifespan
perspective. The latter differentiates older adults from other groups. Our results as
illustrated by the most chosen scenarios, indicate that the technology that promotes
43
these elements can consider various volunteering and altruistic activities involving
multiple stakeholders, from different formal and informal reference groups to solving
important societal problems.
7.2.2. Design for pleasure
Design for pleasure brings features that enable feeling good and doing good to the
forefront of assistive technology development. Mental satisfaction and physical pleasure
are major determinants of feeling good (Figure 5). Accordingly, technology for later life
should employ aesthetical representations and services that elicit engaging sensory
experiences and positive emotional responses.
Our results confirm active aging narratives on embedding physical activity with
social and mental activities (Fernández-Mayoralas et al., 2015; Light et al., 2015;
Schutzer and Graves, 2004; Vines et al., 2015a). Existing findings address the
complexity of these relations partially, for example, by focusing on self-efficacy
(Brassington et al., 2002), social support (Litt et al., 2002), or persuasion (Gallagher and
Updegraff, 2012). We provide a more comprehensive view of physical activity in older
adulthood concerning factors of behavioral intention. The elements are interrelated and
should be equally considered - doing good highlights socializing and mobility as the
primary gains from doing activities while feeling good assumes that physical pleasure
from doing the activities is entangled with mental satisfaction.
7.3. Limitations
Our sample is relatively small. Therefore, the work presented in this paper does not
provide an exclusive and prescriptive set of user requirements for active aging
technology but sets the stage for further inquiry inspired by the initial model supported
with empirical findings.
44
The study described in the paper is exclusively based on the perceptions of a
sample of English older adults, and it may affect the generalizability of our findings.
Also, the fact that the participants were generally healthy may have influenced
inclination towards the personas and scenarios representing healthy and active older
adults. Cultural differences could arise when applying the model to collect user
requirements from other demographic groups - people from other countries may
respond differently. Further research into the differences in using the model's constructs
for older adults from different countries and cultures is appropriate.
Given our study's early nature, specific elements such as service or information
quality did not emerge. The model of desires provides user-centric terminology and
means for collecting and organizing user requirements. However, the importance of its
factors may vary, depending on the technology. Further investigation is needed to verify
and ground the model for different design cases for active aging and compare its
effectiveness to other models and approaches.
8. Conclusion
We present the model of user requirements for a more inclusive, active aging
technology based on the empirical study with older users. The model builds on factors
that influence older adults' intention to engage with preferred activities framed as
desires. It paints a holistic picture of older user requirements as follows:
• mental satisfaction and physical pleasure (feeling good) and socializing,
volunteering and utility (doing good),
• family, friends and professionals (significant others), as influencing through
encouraging use and similar others characterized by common interests and
health, and mixed age (reference group) as influencing by use of the technology,
45
• ergonomics, reliability, function quality and availability (resources) and
usability, mobility and benefits (competence).
The fine-grained user requirements structure can serve as an analytical tool and
help designers to discover and explicate (un)successful design paths or features as early
as possible. It has two implications. The model can enable a critical reflection on the
existing designs and design processes from a motivational viewpoint. In addition, it can
guide new designs and transfer reoccurring, successful combinations into design
patterns for active aging technology. A promising line of research would be to examine
the interplay among different factors of user intention in specific settings of a
recommendation technology for leisure activities in older age.
Acknowledgment
Our research was supported by the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No. 643644 (ACANTO: A
CyberphysicAl social NeTwOrk using robot friends). We thank Mark Mushiba for
creating the scenarios' animated storyboards, all participants of the study for their help
in evaluating the scenarios, and anonymous reviewers for valuable suggestions for
improving the paper.
References
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 50(2), 179-211.
Amirabdollahian, F., Akker, R., Bedaf, S., Bormann, R., Draper, H., Evers, V., Pérez,
J., Gelderblom, G., Ruiz, C., Hewson, D., Hu, N., Koay, K., Kröse, B.,
Lehmann, H., Mart, P., Michel, H., Prevot-Huille, H., Reiser, U., Saunders, J.,
Sorell, T., Stienstra, J., Syrdal, D., Walters, M., & Dautenhahn, K. (2013).
Assistive technology design and development for acceptable robotics
46
companions for ageing years, Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics, 4(2), 94-
112.
Anderson, N.D., Damianakis, T., Kröger, E., Wagner, L.M., Dawson, D.R., Binns,
M.A., Bernstein, S., Caspi, E. & Cook, S.L. (2014). The benefits associated with
volunteering among seniors: a critical review and recommendations for future
research. Psychological Bulletin, 140(6), 1505.
Barnard, Y., Bradley, M. D., Hodgson, F., & Lloyd, A. D. (2013). Learning to use new
technologies by older adults: Perceived difficulties, experimentation behaviour
and usability. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(4), 1715-1724.
Beer, J. M., & Takayama, L. (2011). Mobile remote presence systems for older adults:
acceptance, benefits, and concerns. In Proceedings of the 6th international
conference on Human-robot interaction, ACM, 19-26.
Brassington, G. S., Atienza, A. A., Perczek, R. E., DiLorenzo, T. M., & King, A. C.
(2002). Intervention-related cognitive versus social mediators of exercise
adherence in the elderly. American journal of preventive medicine, 23(2), 80-86.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
research in psychology, 3(2), 77-101.
Carroll, J. M., Convertino, G., Farooq, U., & Rosson, M. B. (2012). The firekeepers:
aging considered as a resource. Universal access in the information society,
11(1), 7-15.
Cesta, A., Cortellessa, G., Fracasso, F., Orlandini, A., & Turno, M. (2018). User needs
and preferences on AAL systems that support older adults and their carers.
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, 10(1), 49-70.
Czaja, S. J., Charness, N., Fisk, A. D., Hertzog, C., Nair, S. N., Rogers, W. A., & Sharit,
J. (2006). Factors predicting the use of technology: findings from the Center for
Research and Education on Aging and Technology Enhancement
(CREATE). Psychology and aging, 21(2), 333.
Colcombe, S., & Kramer, A. F. (2003). Fitness effects on the cognitive function of older
adults: a meta-analytic study. Psychological science, 14(2), 125-130.
Cornwell, E. Y., & Waite, L. J. (2009). Social disconnectedness, perceived isolation,
and health among older adults. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 50(1), 31-
48.
Cozza, M., De Angeli, A., & Tonolli, L. (2017). Ubiquitous technologies for older
people. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 1-13.
47
Danielsen, A., Olofsen, H., & Bremdal, B. A. (2016). Increasing fall risk awareness
using wearables: a fall risk awareness protocol. Journal of biomedical
informatics, 63, 184-194.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology. MIS quarterly, 319-340.
De Angeli, A., Jovanovic, M., McNeill, A., Coventry, L., (2020). Desires for Active
Ageing Technology. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 138,
102412.
De Graaf, M. M., Allouch, S. B., & Klamer, T. (2015). Sharing a life with Harvey:
Exploring the acceptance of and relationship-building with a social robot.
Computers in Human Behavior, 43, 1-14.
De Schutter, B., Brown, J. A., & Vanden Abeele, V. (2015). The domestication of
digital games in the lives of older adults. New Media & Society, 17(7), 1170-
1186.
Elers, P., Hunter, I., Whiddett, D., Lockhart, C., Guesgen, H., & Singh, A. (2018). User
requirements for technology to assist aging in place: qualitative study of older
people and their informal support networks. JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 6(6),
e10741.
Farage, M. A., Miller, K. W., Ajayi, F., & Hutchins, D. (2012). Design principles to
accommodate older adults. Global journal of health science, 4(2), 2.
Fernández-Mayoralas, G., Rojo-Pérez, F., Martínez-Martín, P., Prieto-Flores, M.E.,
Rodríguez-Blázquez, C., Martín-García, S., Rojo-Abuín, J.M. & Forjaz, M.J.
(2015). Active ageing and quality of life: factors associated with participation in
leisure activities among institutionalized older adults, with and without
dementia. Aging & mental health, 19(11), 1031-1041.
Gallagher, K. M., & Updegraff, J. A. (2012). Health message framing effects on
attitudes, intentions, and behavior: a meta-analytic review. Annals of behavioral
medicine, 43(1), 101-116.
Giaccardi, E., Kuijer, L., & Neven, L. (2016). Design for resourceful ageing:
intervening in the ethics of gerontechnology. In Design Research Society 50th
Anniversary Conference, DRS2016.
Gerling, K., Ray, M., & Evans, A. (2017). Designing for Agency and Compassion:
Critical Reflections on Technology to Support Physical Activity in Late Life.
Paper presented at the 1st GetAMoveOn Annual Symposium, London, UK.
48
Gillespie, L. D., Robertson, M. C., Gillespie, W. J., Sherrington, C., Gates, S., Clemson,
L. M., & Lamb, S. E. (2012). Interventions for preventing falls in older people
living in the community. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 9(11).
Heerink, M., Kröse, B., Evers, V., & Wielinga, B. (2010). Assessing acceptance of
assistive social agent technology by older adults: the almere model. International
Journal of Social Robotics, 2(4), 361-375.
Kachouie, R., Sedighadeli, S., Khosla, R., & Chu, M. T. (2014). Socially assistive
robots in elderly care: a mixed-method systematic literature review.
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 30(5), 369-393.
Kim, E. S., & Konrath, S. H. (2016). Volunteering is prospectively associated with
health care use among older adults. Social Science & Medicine, 149, 122-129.
Khosla, R., Nguyen, K., & Chu, M. T. (2017). Human robot engagement and
acceptability in residential aged care. International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction, 33(6), 510-522.
Kleanthous, S., Christophorou, C., Tsiourti, C., Dantas, C., Wintjens, R., Samaras, G.,
& Christodoulou, E. (2016). Analysis of elderly users’ preferences and
expectations on service robot’s personality, appearance and interaction. In
International Conference on Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population.
Springer, Cham, 35-44.
Lazar, A., & Nguyen, D. H. (2017). Successful Leisure in Independent Living
Communities: Understanding Older Adults' Motivations to Engage in Leisure
Activities. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 7042-7056.
Lee, C., & Coughlin, J. F. (2015). Perspective: older adults' adoption of technology: an
integrated approach to identifying determinants and barriers. Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 32(5), 747-759.
Light, A., Leong, T. W., & Robertson, T. (2015). Ageing well with CSCW. In ECSCW
2015: Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work. Springer International Publishing, 295-304.
Light, A., Pedell, S., Robertson, T., Waycott, J., Bell, J., Durick, J., & Leong, T. W.
(2016). What's Special about Aging. Interactions, 23(2), 66-69.
Litt, M. D., Kleppinger, A., & Judge, J. O. (2002). Initiation and maintenance of
exercise behavior in older women: predictors from the social learning model.
Journal of behavioral medicine, 25(1), 83-97.
49
Macedo, I. M. (2017). Predicting the acceptance and use of information and
communication technology by older adults: An empirical examination of the
revised UTAUT2. Computers in Human Behavior, 75, 935-948.
Manzini, E. (2015). Design, when everybody designs: An introduction to design for
social innovation. MIT press.
McGlynn, S. A., Kemple, S., Mitzner, T. L., King, C. H. A., & Rogers, W. A. (2017).
Understanding the potential of PARO for healthy older adults. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 100, 33-47.
McNeill, A., et. al., (2017). User requirements refinement report, ACANTO project
Deliverable 1.7. http://www.ict-acanto.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/D1.7.pdf
Accessed 17.01.2021.
Mitzner, T.L., Boron, J.B., Fausset, C.B., Adams, A.E., Charness, N., Czaja, S.J.,
Dijkstra, K., Fisk, A.D., Rogers, W.A. & Sharit, J. (2010). Older adults talk
technology: Technology usage and attitudes. Computers in Human Behavior,
26(6), 1710-1721.
Montano, D. E., & Kasprzyk, D. (2008). Theory of reasoned action, theory of planned
behavior, and the integrated behavioral model. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer & K.
Viswanath (Eds.), Health behavior and health education: Theory, Research and
Practice, 67-96.
Müller, C., Hornung, D., Hamm, T., & Wulf, V. (2015). Measures and tools for
supporting ICT appropriation by elderly and non tech-savvy persons in a long-
term perspective. In ECSCW 2015: Proceedings of the 14th European
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Springer International
Publishing.
Nomis. (2017). Official Labour Market Statistics. https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/
Accessed 17.01.2021.
Orlandini, A., Kristoffersson, A., Almquist, L., et al., (2016). Excite project: A review
of forty-two months of robotic telepresence technology evolution. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 25(3), 204-221.
Parra, C., Silveira, P., Far, I.K., Daniel, F., De Bruin, E.D., Cernuzzi, L., D'Andrea, V.
& Casati, F. (2014). Information technology for active ageing: A review of
theory and practice. Foundations and Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction,
7(4), 351-448.
50
Peruzzini, M., & Germani, M. (2014). Designing a user-centred ICT platform for active
aging. In 2014 IEEE/ASME 10th International Conference on Mechatronic and
Embedded Systems and Applications (MESA), 1-6.
Preedy, V. R. (2010). Handbook of disease burdens and quality of life measures, 4271-
4272. In R. R. Watson (Ed.). New York: Springer.
Preece, J., Rogers, Y., & Sharp, H. (2015). Interaction design: beyond human-computer
interaction. John Wiley & Sons.
Pu, L., Moyle, W., Jones, C., & Todorovic, M. (2019). The effectiveness of social
robots for older adults: a systematic review and meta–analysis of randomized
controlled studies. The Gerontologist, 59(1), e37-e51.
Robinson, H., MacDonald, B., & Broadbent, E. (2014). The role of healthcare robots for
older people at home: a review. International Journal of Social Robotics, 6(4),
575-591.
Schutzer, K. A., & Graves, B. S. (2004). Barriers and motivations to exercise in older
adults. Preventive medicine, 39(5), 1056-1061.
Silverstone, R., & Haddon, L. (1996). Design and the domestication of information and
communication technologies: Technical change and everyday life. In:
Silverstone R and Mansell R (eds), Communication by design: The politics of
information and communication technologies, Oxford University Press.
Spaniolas, K., Cheng, J. D., Gestring, M. L., Sangosanya, A., Stassen, N. A., & Bankey,
P. E. (2010). Ground level falls are associated with significant mortality in
elderly patients. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 69(4), 821-825.
Strawbridge, W. J., Deleger, S., Roberts, R. E., & Kaplan, G. A. (2002). Physical
activity reduces the risk of subsequent depression for older adults. American
journal of epidemiology, 156(4), 328-334.
Stel, V. S., Smit, J. H., Pluijm, S. M., & Lips, P. (2004). Consequences of falling in
older men and women and risk factors for health service use and functional
decline. Age and ageing, 33(1), 58-65.
Stenner, P., McFarquhar, T., & Bowling, A. (2011). Older people and ‘active ageing’:
Subjective aspects of ageing actively. Journal of health psychology, 16(3), 467-
477.
Sutcliffe, A. (2003). Scenario-based requirements engineering. In Proceedings of
the11th IEEE international Requirements Engineering Conference, 320-329.
51
Sun, F., Norman, I. J., & While, A. E. (2013). Physical activity in older people: a
systematic review. BMC public health, 13(1), 449.
Suwa, S., Tsujimura, M., Ide, H., Kodate, N., Ishimaru, M., Shimamura, A., & Yu, W.
(2020). Home-care Professionals’ Ethical Perceptions of the Development and
Use of Home-care Robots for Older Adults in Japan. International Journal of
Human–Computer Interaction, 36(14), 1-9.
Tay, L., & Diener, E. (2011). Needs and subjective well-being around the world.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 101(2), 354.
The European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme - Societal
Challenge 1 (DG CONNECT/H). Grant agreement 643644. “ACANTO - A
CyberphysicAl social NeTwOrk using robot friends”. http://www.ict-acanto.eu/
Accessed 17.01.2021.
Tinetti, M. E., & Williams, C. S. (1998). The effect of falls and fall injuries on
functioning in community-dwelling older persons. The Journals of Gerontology
Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 53(2), 112-119.
Truong, K. N., Hayes, G. R., & Abowd, G. D. (2006). Storyboarding: an empirical
determination of best practices and effective guidelines. In Proceedings of the
6th AMCM conference on Designing Interactive systems, 12-21.
Uzor, S., & Baillie, L. (2014). Investigating the long-term use of exergames in the home
with elderly fallers. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems, 2813-2822.
Varma, V.R., Tan, E.J., Gross, A.L., Harris, G., Romani, W., Fried, L.P., Rebok, G.W.
& Carlson, M.C. (2016). Effect of community volunteering on physical activity:
A randomized controlled trial. American journal of preventive medicine, 50(1),
106-110.
Vandemeulebroucke, T., de Casterlé, B. D., & Gastmans, C. (2018). How do older
adults experience and perceive socially assistive robots in aged care: a
systematic review of qualitative evidence. Aging & mental health, 22(2), 149-
167.
Vassli, L. T., & Farshchian, B. A. (2018). Acceptance of Health-Related ICT among
Elderly People Living in the Community: A Systematic Review of Qualitative
Evidence. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 34(2), 99-116.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of
information technology: Toward a unified view. MIS quarterly, 425-478.
52
Vines, J., Pritchard, G., Wright, P., Olivier, P., & Brittain, K. (2015a). An age-old
problem: Examining the discourses of ageing in HCI and strategies for future
research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 22(1),
2.
Vines, J., Wright, P. C., Silver, D., Winchcombe, M., & Olivier, P. (2015b).
Authenticity, Relatability and Collaborative Approaches to Sharing Knowledge
about Assistive Living Technology. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing,
82-94.
Yuan, C. W., Hanrahan, B. V., Rosson, M. B., & Carroll, J. M. (2018). Coming of Old
Age: Understanding Older Adults’ Engagement and Needs in Coproduction
Activities for Healthy Ageing. Behaviour & Information Technology, 1-15.
Yusif, S., Soar, J., & Hafeez-Baig, A. (2016). Older people, assistive technologies, and
the barriers to adoption: A systematic review. International journal of medical
informatics, 94, 112-116.
Waycott, J., Vetere, F., Pedell, S., Morgans, A., Ozanne, E., & Kulik, L. (2016). Not
For Me: Older Adults Choosing Not to Participate in a Social Isolation
Intervention. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 745-757.
Well-being for life. (2017). Know your city: a profile of the people living in Newcastle:
The people living, working or learning in Newcastle https://bit.ly/397DCQE
Accessed 17.01.2021.
Wilkinson, C. R., & De Angeli, A. (2014). Applying user centred and participatory
design approaches to commercial product development. Design Studies, 35(6),
614-631.
Wilson, R. S., Hebert, L. E., Scherr, P. A., Dong, X., Leurgens, S. E., & Evans, D. A.
(2012). Cognitive decline after hospitalization in a community population of
older persons. Neurology, 78(13), 950-956.
Whelan, S., Murphy, K., Barrett, E., Krusche, C., Santorelli, A., & Casey, D. (2018).
Factors affecting the acceptability of social robots by older adults including
people with dementia or cognitive impairment: A literature review. International
Journal of Social Robotics, 1-26.
World Health Organization - WHO. (2002). Active geing: a policy framework.
https://bit.ly/392oEuZ (p. 4) Accessed 17.01.2021.
53
Wu, Y. H., Wrobel, J., Cornuet, M., Kerhervé, H., Damnée, S., & Rigaud, A. S. (2014).
Acceptance of an assistive robot in older adults: a mixed-method study of
human-robot interaction over a 1-month period in the Living Lab setting. Clin
Interv Aging, 9, 801-811.
Zwijsen, S. A., Niemeijer, A. R., & Hertogh, C. M. (2011). Ethics of using assistive
technology in the care for community-dwelling elderly people: an overview of
the literature. Aging & mental health, 15(4), 419-427.
54
Appendix
The interview script is initially reported in the ACANTO project deliverable
(McNeill et al., 2017). The starting questions concerned facilitators and barriers,
whereas the remaining questions examined desires (see Figure 2) as factors influencing
behavioral intentions to use the ACANTO system.
Category Question
Facilitators What abilities does this person have that the
system can encourage?
Barriers What problems does this person face ?
How well do you think the system solves these
problems?
Feeling good
Why would this person use this system?
How would the system make the person feel?
Doing good What might the person gain from using the
system?
Significant others How would other people’s views affect the
user’s willingness to use the system?
Reference group How would it affect the person’s willingness
to use the system if other people used it?
Resources What sort of things might help the person to
use the system?
What sort of things might make it hard for the
person to use the system?
Competence How important is it that the person finds it
easy to use the system?
Counter question Why would this person not use this system?
About the Authors
Dr Mlađan Jovanović received PhD in Computer Science at the University of
Belgrade in 2013. He is an Assistant Professor at Singidunum University, Belgrade.
Before academia, he worked in the industry, focusing on the interactive computing
systems. His main research interests include technologies for later life and human-
centered AI.
Dr Antonella De Angeli is a Full Professor of Human-Computer Interaction at the Free
University of Bolzano, Italy. She holds a PhD in Experimental Psychology from the
University of Trieste. Antonella has a track record of successful social innovation
55
projects. Recently, her research interests include active aging and participatory design.
Dr Andrew McNeill is a senior lecturer in Psychology at Northumbria University,
Newcastle, UK. He regularly conducts research in both social psychology and human-
computer interaction, especially in privacy and technologies for well-being of older
adults.
Dr Lynne Coventry is the Director of PaCT Lab (Psychology and Communication
Technology) at the University of Northumbria, UK. She received a PhD in Psychology.
She has been working on the research that incorporates understanding of people, their
use and acceptance of technology into the requirements and design process.
