1 / 43
Enhancing the Usability of Self-service
Kiosks for Older Adults: Effects of Using
Privacy Partitions and Chairs
Hyesun Chung
Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
Woojin Park
Department of Industrial Engineering and Institute for Industrial Systems Innovation,
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
Contact information for corresponding author
Woojin Park
Professor
Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University
1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, South Korea
woojinpark@snu.ac.kr
82-2-880-4310 (Office)
82-10-2075-9468 (Cell phone)
82-2-889-8560 (Fax)
2 / 43
Abstract
Objective: This study aimed to evaluate the effects of possible physical design features
of self-service kiosks (SSK), privacy partitions and chairs, on workload and task
performance of older users during a typical SSK task.
Background: Actionable design guidelines for lessening physical demands, raising
confidence toward SSK, and eliminating situational deterrents for older users are lacking.
Method: The current study comparatively evaluated eight physical SSK design
alternatives, which were the combinations of two levels (Yes/No) of three physical
design variables: Side Partition, Back Partition, Chair. Younger (n = 22) and older (n =
27) participants performed a menu ordering task using each physical design alternative.
Results: Older participants showed a large variation in task performance across the
design alternatives indicating stronger impacts of the physical design features. In
particular, task completion time was significantly shorter while the average reaction time
was longer when they were seated than standing. Sitting also reduced workload in
multiple dimensions, including time pressure and frustration. In addition, the use of either
side or back partitions reduced mean ratings of mental demand and effort.
Conclusion: Physical design features that can lower divided attention costs or assist
postural control would benefit older adults during the use of SSK. The study suggests
placing chairs and either side or back partitions to enhance older adults’s user experience.
Application: The physical design guidelines derived in this study are expected to
enhance the usability of SSK for older adults and thereby contribute to increasing their
social engagement and quality of life.
3 / 43
Keywords
Self-service kiosk (SSK), Physical design, Designing for older adults, Workload, Task
performance
Précis
A laboratory experiment was conducted to evaluate the effects of using privacy partitions
and chairs on workload and task performance when using self-service kiosks (SSK). Two
age groups, younger and older, were compared in the effects of the physical design
features. Making use of chairs and either side or back partitions was beneficial, especially
for older adults.
4 / 43
INTRODUCTION
Since the advent of automated teller machines (ATMs), self-service technologies (SST)
have been increasingly adopted. The main advantages they provide include time and cost
savings, greater control over service delivery, and convenience (Meuter & Bitner, 1998;
Kauffman & Lally, 1994; Dabholkar, 1996; Bitner et al., 2000; Salomann et al., 2006).
Currently, they are widely available across diverse service organizations, such as fast-
food restaurants, banks, hospitals, information centers, and more (Hagen & Sandnes,
2010); and, a significant portion of the population has some form of SST use experience
(Wang et al., 2012), including the interaction with self-service kiosks (SSK). The
deployment of SST would increase further as consumers continue to embrace SST, and
businesses rush to reap the benefits (Kiosk Marketplace, 2019). The interactive kiosk
market is expected to grow from USD 26.2 billion in 2020 to USD 32.8 billion by 2025,
at a CAGR of 4.6% (Markets and Markets, 2020).
Despite their benefits and utilities, however, SST also came with their own
problems. One such problem is the difficulties experienced by older adults during the use
of SSK (e.g., Park, 2019; Miller, 2019; Poulter, 2017). Many older adults users find it
difficult to read text information displayed on SSK (Hagen & Sandnes, 2010), figure out
the correct user action sequence for a given SSK task (Barnard et al., 2013), and perform
prolonged standing while conducting an SSK task (Park, 2019). Many describe the
experience as stressful, unpleasant, and physically demanding. These difficulties can be
largely attributed to the failure in considering the personal, attitudinal and situational
characteristics of older adults users in the design of SSK. Aging is associated with
5 / 43
significant declines in perceptual, cognitive and motor control abilities, and muscular
strengths (Iancu, I. & Iancu, B., 2017; Caparni et al., 2012). Older adults are also
characterized by technology anxiety and lack of confidence towards technologies that
negatively affect task performance during the use of technologies (e.g., Dean, 2008;
Wang et al., 2012; Gelbrich & Sattler, 2014). These attitudes are known to be invoked by
situational stressors, such as time pressure and presence of others.
The difficulties described above represent a significant problem as they can
seriously compromise the functioning and well-being of older adults in everyday life.
Indeed, they should be understood as barriers that exacerbate the current generational
digital divide for older adults population (Van Dijk, 2006). The digital divide, defined as
inequities in terms of who accesses and benefits from the digital landscape (Fang et al.,
2019), is deeply related to decreased social engagement and lower life independence (Hill
et al., 2015). It is also known to produce a new form of social isolation referred to as
“digital exclusion” (Seifert et al., 2018). Hill et al. (2015) described digital exclusion as a
“cumulative, self-propelling spiral of isolation whereby the digitally rich continue to
become included and the digitally poor continue to become isolated within a culture
where more of society's business and culture is conducted through technology.”
Thus, in human factors and related fields, much research has attempted to
improve the usability of SSK by creating designs that accommodate the characteristics of
older adults users. The suggested solutions mainly involved designing clear inputs and
outputs with the use of proper graphical user interface elements (e.g., color, text size,
button size and spacing) and feedback, and/or adjusting the parameters of the touchscreen
interfaces (e.g., display color, contrast ratio, inclination angle, height) according to the
6 / 43
user’s body dimensions (e.g., Charness et al., 2010; Hawthorn, 2000; Caparni et al.,
2012; Tsai & Lee, 2009; Hwangbo et al., 2012; Colle & Hiszem, 2004; Gao & Sun, 2015;
Sesto et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2014; Jin et al., 2007; Murata & Iwase, 2005; Schedlbauer,
2007; Hagen & Sandnes, 2010).
Despite the past research efforts, however, many of the difficulties that older
adults users experience during the use of SSK remain unaddressed at this time. Design
solutions or guidelines for lessening muscular loadings, raising confidence, and
eliminating situational stresses for older adults do not seem available. Also, little research
has been conducted concerning these issues.
One promising approach to address the unresolved difficulties above is innovating
the physical design of SSK. The term “physical design” here refers to deciding upon the
physical form factor design of SSK. It involves specifying physical design parameters
and also making decisions on the inclusion of physical design features, such as privacy
partitions and a chair.
The physical design is thought to represent an opportunity for enhancing the user
experience through simple design improvements. For example, adding side partitions and
a chair to SSK may help the older users with balance control as the two physical design
features would work as visual references and physical support, respectively. It is possible
to hypothesize that such reductions in balance control demands would free up cognitive
resources for older adults users so that they can better concentrate on the main SSK task –
multiple dual-task studies involving older adults participants (Lacour et al., 2008; Marsh
& Geel, 2000; Verhaeghen et al., 2003) point to this possibility. Also, installing side and
7 / 43
back partitions would likely mitigate the situational deterrents such as time pressure and
may help alleviate the older users’ anxiety and boost their confidence toward using SSK.
Making use of a chair may also help reduce time pressure, thus leading them to a more
confident state. All of these changes may lead to better performance because a high level
of self-efficacy would activate the cognitive and intellectual functioning, and
consequently improve task performance (Bandura et al., 1999).
Thus, in an effort to contribute to improving the experience of the older users
during the use of SSK and further eliminating the digital divide, the objective of the
current study was to explore possible benefits of using three physical design features
(side partitions, a back partition, and a chair) that can be easily added to SSK. In
particular, the study aimed to determine if the physical design features would reduce
workload and improve task performance of older users during a typical SSK task, and
investigate if they benefit younger users in similar ways. The study also attempted to
evaluate eight physical design alternatives in terms of task performance and workload.
On the basis of the experimental results, this study provided design guidelines on the
utilization of the physical design features.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Characteristics of the aged population
The difficulties that older adults users experience during the use of SSK can largely be
attributed to their cognitive, physical, attitudinal and situational characteristics. Some of
the relevant characteristics and their impacts are described in what follows:
8 / 43
Cognitive characteristics
Older adults experience declines in visual acuity (Gao & Sun, 2015). The reduced vision
is the major challenge as most user interface elements of SSK are visual (Caparni et al.,
2012).
Age-associated changes in the cognitive system are also characterized by the
reduction of cognitive resources available (Cerella, 1985), and, in particular, the declines
in memory, executive functions, and speed of information processing (Deary et al.,
2009). Many technological systems, including SSK, rely on a person's ability to keep
information active; however, this could be demanding for many older users (Caparni et
al., 2012).
Older adults also typically do not have prior experiences of or mental models for
using SSK or similar systems - learning to control a system requires constructing an
adequate mental model that describes the causal connections between user actions,
system responses, and user goals (Lewis, 1986). Acquiring new mental models for using
systems with high degrees of freedom, such as SSK, is difficult for inexperienced older
adults (Barnard et al., 2013).
Physical characteristics
Older adults are generally smaller in stature relative to younger adults (Czaja et al.,
2019). SSK designed without considering the anthropometric characteristics can
disaccommodate a large portion of older adults population.
9 / 43
Older adults also experience declines in motor control, dexterity, speed of
execution, hand-eye coordination, mobility, and agility (Iancu, I. & Iancu, B., 2017).
Aging also has a degenerative effect on hand functions, including declines in manual
speed and finger dexterity (Ranganathan et al., 2001), thus hindering them from making
precise selections of small interface targets (Caparni et al., 2012).
Balance and coordination capabilities (Teasdale et al., 1993) as well as muscular
strengths (Caparni et al., 2012) decrease as a function of age. Consequently, it is harder
for older adults to perform physically demanding tasks, including prolonged standing.
Attitudinal and situational characteristics
Older adults are generally less confident in utilizing technology, and their under-
confidence is a significant source of difficulties that they encounter in mastering new
technology (Marqui et al., 2002). In fact, according to the survey by Dean (2008), older
consumers had fewer experiences of SST and less confidence in using them. They tended
to think that they might make mistakes that could not be corrected by themselves (Wang
et al., 2012). As self-efficacy positively correlates with the intention to use technology
(Walker & Johnson, 2006; Lee & Coughlin, 2015; Peral-Peral et al., 2019) and SST
(Simon & Usunier, 2007; Blut et al., 2016; Wang, 2017), increasing older adults’s
confidence and perceived self-efficacy through design would encourage them to use SSK.
Older adults may also be more susceptible to situational deterrents such as
perceived crowding, implied time pressure, and social presence of co-actors or non-
interactive strangers when using SSK. The situational factors are known to invoke
technology anxiety which lowers the intention to use SST (Gelbrich & Sattler, 2014;
10 / 43
Argo et al., 2005; Dabholkar & Bagozzi, 2002; Simon & Usunier, 2007; Wang et al.,
2012) and negatively affect task performance especially when the task is complex and not
well-learned (Zajonc, 1965). Time pressure, in particular, becomes intensified when the
task is unfamiliar (Rastegary & Landy, 1993). As using SSK is rather a complex and
unfamiliar task for older adults, the situational effects would be substantial for them.
Self-service kiosks design for the aged population
Multiple previous studies suggested ways to accommodate older users’ cognitive and
physical characteristics in designing SSK. The suggested solutions to the cognitive
aspects of difficulties include providing clear adjustable outputs with the use of
appropriately sized text and high contrast colors (Charness et al., 2010; Hawthorn, 2000),
and managing system complexity by controlling the number of levels of the menu to a
minimum (Sharma et al., 2016; Czaja, 1996), or simplifying functionality based on the
task demands and needs for services of older adults (Chan et al., 2009). Also, some
studies discussed the importance of using appropriate feedback in order to minimize the
demands on working memory (Caparni et al., 2012; Lee & Zhai, 2009). Caparni et al.
(2012) noted the need for proper feedback to inform users of where they are in the system
and where they have been. Modalities of feedback have also been an important topic.
Some studies attempted to determine the modality or modality combination that increases
ease of use (e.g., Tsai & Lee, 2009; Hwangbo et al., 2012). Furthermore, novel
interactions have been proposed to aid older users who lack interaction abilities due to the
absence of proper mental models. In the work of Mäkinen et al. (2002), a newly
developed SSK incorporated a camera that recognized a user's face and facial expressions
11 / 43
to help those who do not know what to do in real-time. Another study by Niculescu et al.
(2016) developed a multimodal SSK which included natural language processing. The
proposed SSK enabled users to use speech input with their smartphones in addition to
conventional touch operations, thus encouraging them to verbally ask for help whenever
troubled. In fact, multi-modality was found to increase the functionality and flexibility of
SSK by taking advantage of diverse types of input and output during interactions (Günay
& Erbuğ, 2015).
A number of studies have examined the design of SSK user interfaces for
accommodating older users’ physical characteristics. Multiple studies investigated the
effects of target size, button spacing, and inclination angle on user performance and
preference during the use of touchscreen interfaces (Colle & Hiszem, 2004; Gao & Sun,
2015; Sesto et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2014; Jin et al., 2007; Murata & Iwase, 2005;
Schedlbauer, 2007). An intelligent user interface in which the SSK height and the sizes
and locations of texts and buttons adapt to the user's physical characteristics has been
proposed (Hagen & Sandnes, 2010) - from the user-centered design perspective,
adjustable products that accommodate individual users’ unique anthropometric
characteristics benefit user experience and health outcomes (Dianat et al., 2018). In
addition, some studies have explored the effects of posture (sitting or standing) on
touchscreen task performance (Schedlbauer et al., 2006; Chourasia et al., 2013).
Chourasia et al. (2013) reported that in general, the frequency of misses and task
completion time were higher for standing than sitting, thus suggesting that postural
conditions be considered when discussing the accessibility and usability of SSK.
12 / 43
Finally, multiple studies have developed user interface design guidelines for SSK
that address different dimensions of difficulties of the older population (e.g., Maguire,
1999; Phiriyapokanon, 2011; Motti et al., 2013). Most guidelines discussed the
importance of system simplicity, proper input and output, and feedback design, and,
emphasized the need for customization. The existing guidelines, however, generally did
not include recommendations on physical design.
METHOD
Participants
Two groups of participants, the younger and older groups, participated in this research
study. The younger group (20~35 years old) consisted of twelve males and ten females;
the older group (55~70 years old), fourteen males and thirteen females. Table 1 presents a
summary of the participants' demographic data. At the time of the study, all participants
were free of obvious musculoskeletal disorders and had a normal or corrected-to-normal
vision in both eyes.
The research complied with the American Psychological Association Code of
Ethics and was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Seoul National University.
Informed consent was obtained from each participant.
13 / 43
Table 1. Summary of age, technology familiarity, and frequency of SSK usage (last 3
months) for the two participant age groups.
Dimension Younger Older
Age (years) 23.7 ± 2.1 61.9 ± 4.4
Technology familiarity (10-point scale) 8.0 ± 0.7 2.4 ± 0.8
Number of SSK uses in the last 3 months 8.7 ± 1.7 1.3 ± 1.2
*Note: Technology familiarity was assessed utilizing the 10-point frequency scale from
Rosen et al. (2013).
Experimental setup
An experimental setup was created to closely approximate the real usage situation in
which people stand in a queue in front of SSK and take turns to order food items using
the machine. Two identical SSK were installed in a row in a laboratory. Each consisted of
a 23-in touch screen monitor, which is widely used in many restaurants in South Korea,
and a height-adjustable monitor stand. The laboratory was spacious enough to allow
much space ahead of the SSK so that participants could line up in front of them. In
addition, three physical design features, side partitions, a back partition, and a chair, were
prepared – they were used to construct different physical design alternatives. Three
design variables, Side Partition, Back Partition, and Chair, were used in combination to
represent different physical design possibilities of SSK. Each of these physical design
variables had two levels: Yes (use of the feature) and No (no use).
14 / 43
Physical design alternatives of self-service kiosks
The current study comparatively evaluated a total of eight physical design alternatives of
SSK, which were the combinations of the levels of the three physical design variables: 8
= two levels of Side Partition (Yes/No) × two levels of Back Partition (Yes/No) × two
levels of Chair (Yes/No). The participants performed the experimental task (a food
ordering task) in each of the eight physical design alternatives. With Side Partition, Back
Partition, and Chair represented as alphabet letters S, B, and C, the alternatives were
indicated as S1B1C1, S0B0C1, etc., where the number right to each alphabet symbol
indicated whether or not the physical design feature was used (1: Yes, 0: No). For
instance, S1B1C1 indicates the design where there were side and back partitions and
chairs (Figure 1a), while S0B0C1 represents the design where there were only chairs
(Figure 1b).
Figure 1. Experimental setup. (a) Three physical design features. (b) Participants
performing the experimental task in S0B0C1.
Task
The experimental task was a food ordering task. Each participant ordered a food item on
the menu using the SSK in each of the eight physical design alternatives Each participant
15 / 43
performed a single trial for each physical design alternative and thus a total of eight
experimental trials. In order to motivate the participants to quickly complete the food
ordering task as they usually do in fast-food restaurants, they were informed that the
entire round of the experiment would finish as soon as everyone in the group completed
the task. In each trial, each participant was given an instruction sheet on which a food
item for the trial was written. The food items of the eight trials were all different for each
participant.
The food ordering task consisted of five sub-tasks: selecting the burger, meal size,
toppings, side dish, and beverage. For each sub-task, task accuracy was measured in
terms of correct (Success) or incorrect (Failure) selection.
The BURGER KING®KOREA software application available from Google Play
was used for the task. The Bandicam screen recorder and the open-source multimedia
manipulation tool, FFmpeg, were used along with the Python script for data collection.
Procedure
The participants were assigned to one of eight groups and participated in the experiment
following the schedule of the group. The eight groups had similar age and gender
distributions. The order of the eight experiment trials in each group was designed
according to the Latin square design to ensure a counterbalanced experiment. Seven of
the eight groups consisted of six participants; the other group, seven.
All participants participated in the research study for two days. On the first day,
they were surveyed on their past SSK use experience and were given explanations about
16 / 43
the experimental task. The task was fully explained to and practiced by the participants
before the beginning of the first trial. In each trial, the participants were instructed to line
up in front of the SSK in a single queue and use either of the two which was available on
their turns. At the beginning of each trial, the instructor handed over the instruction sheet
on which the burger, meal size, toppings, side dish, and beverage to be selected were
written. The participants returned to the end of the line when they completed the food
ordering task. Immediately after the completion of the task by all participants in the
group, the participants completed the NASA-TLX questionnaire and took a rest for 15-20
minutes. The process, which required about 30 minutes, was repeated four times a day, a
total of eight times in two days. When the participants completed all trials, they were
thanked and debriefed (Figure 2). In order to control order effects and sequence effects,
the positions of the participants in each queue were also determined according to the
Latin square design.
Figure 2. Experimental procedure.
Independent and dependent variables
In this study, three independent variables (Side Partition, Back Partition and Chair) and a
stratification variable (Age) were considered. Three independent variables (physical
design variables) were within-subjects factors.
17 / 43
Each participant’s task performance was evaluated in terms of task completion
time and accuracy. Three task performance measures, that is, task completion time,
average reaction time, and the number of sub-tasks completed successfully were
employed as dependent variables (Table 2). In addition to the performance measures, the
workload of each participant was evaluated utilizing the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) (Hart & Staveland, 1988). Each
participant rated the perceived workload for each of the six dimensions of workload
(mental demand, physical demand, time pressure, effort, performance, and frustration).
The weighted average workload reflecting each participant's view on the relative
contributions of the six dimensions was also calculated. Figure 3 presents a graphical
summary of the independent/stratification and dependent variables.
Figure 3. Summary of independent/stratification and dependent variables.
18 / 43
Table 2. Task performance measures.
Task Performance Measure Definition/Quantification
Time
Task completion time
The total amount of time between the onset of the trial and completion
of the last operation (s)
Average reaction time Task completion time/(Total number of touch operations -1) (s)
Accuracy
Number of sub-tasks
completed successfully
Full marks: 5
The score was computed as the number of correctly performed sub-
tasks. The five sub-tasks consisted of selecting: (a) burger, (b) meal
size (regular or large), (c) toppings, (d) side dish and (e) beverage.
Data Analyses
The task performance data were examined for outliers prior to statistical analyses.
Among the participants with task performance measures greater than 3 SD above or
below the mean (Plumert & Schwebel, 1997), two participants of the older group were
removed since their time and accuracy measures were both 3 SD below the mean. As
their exceptionally low task accuracy with short task completion time implies careless
participation, all of their data points were removed. Following outlier removal, for each
dependent variable except the number of sub-tasks completed successfully, the study
employed a general linear model of repeated measures to test the statistical significance
of the independent/stratification variables and their interactions; a generalized linear
model was employed for the number of sub-tasks completed successfully. The model
included one between-subjects factor of 2 levels (Age: younger, older) and three within-
subjects factors (Side Partition, Back Partition, Chair) of 2 levels (Yes, No). In cases
where a higher-order interaction was statistically significant, post hoc tests with
Bonferroni corrections were conducted. In addition, for each age group, the eight
physical design alternatives were compared with one another in terms of the mean values
of the workload and task performance measures. Also, a Pearson correlation analysis was
19 / 43
conducted for each pair of a workload and a task performance measure to test a possible
linear relationship between them. All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS 25
(IBM Corp., Armonk, USA), and an alpha level of 0.05 was utilized.
RESULTS
GLM analyses
Task performance
Task performance was evaluated in terms of task completion time and accuracy. Age
differences were significant for all task performance variables. The older group’s mean
task completion time and mean average reaction time were significantly longer than those
of the younger group. The mean number of sub-tasks completed successfully was also
significantly smaller for the older group than the younger group (Table 3, Figures 4a~4c).
Regarding task completion time, aside from the age difference, the Age × Chair
interaction effect was significant (F(1,45)=4.239, p<0.05). In particular, the mean task
completion time was significantly longer for C0 than C1 in the older group (p<0.05;
Table 3, Figure 5a). As to average reaction time, the main effect of Chair
(F(1,45)=7.732, p<0.01) and a two-way interaction of Age × Chair were significant
(F(1,45)=4.328, p<0.05). The mean average reaction time was significantly longer for C1
than C0 in the older group (p<0.001; Table 3, Figure 5b). Concerning the number of sub-
tasks completed successfully, no significant effects other than the age main effect were
found.
20 / 43
Workload
The results of the statistical analyses for each dimension of workload (mental demand,
physical demand, time pressure, performance, effort, and frustration) and for the
weighted average for the six dimensions are presented in Table 3. Age differences were
significant in all dimensions - the older group’s mean ratings were significantly higher
than those of the younger group (Table 3, Figure 4d).
In addition to the age differences, regarding mental demand, a two-way
interaction of Side Partition × Back Partition was significant (F(1,45)=5.089, p<0.05),
with post hoc analyses indicating that mental demand was higher in S0B0 than S0B1
(p<0.05; Table 3, Figure 6a). For physical demand, a two-way interaction of Side
Partition × Chair was significant (F(1,45)=5.582, p<0.05). In particular, the mean
physical demand rating was significantly greater for S0C0 than for S0C1 (p<0.01; Table
3, Figure 6b). As to time pressure, the mean rating was significantly greater for B0 than
B1 (F(1,45)=4.511, p<0.05; Table 3, Figure 6c) and also for C0 than C1 (F(1,45)=5.495,
p<0.05; Table 3, Figure 6d). Concerning performance, the mean rating was significantly
greater for S0 than S1 (F(1,45)=6.179, p<0.05; Table 3, Figure 6e). In regard to effort, a
two-way interaction of Side Partition × Back Partition (F(1,45)=6.612, p<0.05) and a
three-way interaction of Age × Side Partition × Back Partition (F(1,45)=4.776, p<0.05)
were significant. The significant differences were found between S0B0 and S1B0,
between S1B1 and S1B0, and between S0B0 and S0B1 in the older group (p<0.05; Table
3, Figure 6f). In other words, the antagonist interaction was found between Side Partition
and Back partition in the older group. In the case of the younger group, no significant
results were found. As for frustration, the main effect of Chair (F(1,45)=6.864, p<0.05)
21 / 43
and a two-way interaction of Chair × Age were significant (F(1,45)=4.643, p<0.05). In
particular, the mean frustration rating was significantly greater for C0 than C1 in the
older group (p<0.001; Table 3, Figure 6g). In addition, a two-way interaction of Side
Partition × Chair was significant (F(1,45)=4.453, p<0.05), the mean rating was
significantly greater for S0C0 than S0C1 (p<0.001; Table 3, Figure 6h). With regard to
the weighted average workload, the mean score was significantly greater for C0 than C1
(F(1,45)=6.980, p<0.05; Table 3, Figure 6i).
Table 3. Summary of the significant main effects and interactions (*: p<0.05, **: p<0.01,
***: p<0.001).
Dependent variable
Main effect Interaction effect
Age Side Back Chair
Age×
Chair
Side×
Back
Side×
Chair
Age×
Side×
Back
Task
performance
Task completion time *** *
Average reaction time *** * *
Number of sub-tasks completed successfully ***
Workload
Mental demand *** *
Physical demand *** *
Time pressure ** * *
Performance *** *
Effort ** * *
Frustration *** * * *
Weighted average workload *** *
22 / 43
Figure 4. Descriptions of age differences.
Figure 5. Descriptions of significant results for task performance variables.
23 / 43
Figure 6. Descriptions of significant results for workload variables.
Comparison of design alternatives
For each age group, the eight physical design alternatives were compared with one
another in three evaluation criteria – the mean weighted average workload score, mean
task completion time, and mean number of tasks completed successfully. Figure 7
presents a graphical summary of the comparisons; the x-axis and y-axis respectively
24 / 43
indicate the mean task completion time and the mean number of sub-tasks completed
successfully while the mean weighted average workload of each design alternative is
written in the vicinity of the corresponding symbol.
Figure 7. Comparisons of the eight physical design alternatives.
Correlation analyses
Pearson correlation coefficients between the workload and the task performance variables
were computed for each age group (Table 4). Table 4 indicates that overall, linear
correlations between the workload and the task performance variables were more
pronounced for the older group (Table 4b) than for the younger group (Table 4a).
Table 4. Correlations between workload and task performance variables (*: p<0.05, **:
p<0.01; Correlation coefficients larger than 0.3 were highlighted).
25 / 43
(a) Correlations of the younger group.
Dependent variable
Workload
Mental
demand
Physical
demand
Time
pressure
Performance Effort Frustration
Weighted
average
workload
Task
performance
Task completion time 0.29** 0.29** 0.31** 0.34** 0.38** 0.39**
Average reaction time 0.18*
Number of sub-tasks
completed successfully
-0.22**
(b) Correlations of the older group.
Dependent variable
Workload
Mental
demand
Physical
demand
Time
pressure
Performance Effort Frustration
Weighted
average
workload
Task
performance
Task completion time 0.42** 0.34** 0.44** 0.25** 0.44** 0.43** 0.48**
Average reaction time
Number of sub-tasks
completed successfully
-0.40** -0.29** -0.26** -0.30** -0.25** -0.40** -0.39**
DISCUSSION
The research study elucidated the effects of privacy partitions and chairs on task
performance and workload during an SSK task for two age groups. The SSK task was a
typical food ordering task. A total of eight design alternatives (8 = two levels of Side
Partition × two levels of Back Partition × two levels of Chair) were considered.
Age and self-service kiosks (SSK)
The two age groups differed significantly in all dependent variables. The mean task
completion time and the average reaction time were longer, the number of sub-tasks
completed successfully was smaller, and the mean workload scores of all dimensions
were higher for the older group than for the younger (Figure 4). In other words, the older
participants on average required more time to complete the task, and, encountered more
difficulties when completing the sub-tasks.
26 / 43
The observed age impacts on the performance measures are thought to be due to
the cognitive, physical, attitudinal and situational characteristics of older adults. Age-
associated declines in visual information processing and motor control (Walsh & Prasse,
1980; Cerella et al., 1982; Iancu, I. & Iancu, B., 2017) explain the increases in the time-
based performance measures. Similarly, age-related declines in divided attention and
executive control (Craik & McDowd, 1987; Rabbit, 2019; Phillips & Sternthal, 1977)
explain the decreased numbers of sub-tasks completed successfully. Lower confidence of
older adults participants in their ability to complete the tasks and overcome situational
deterrents (Gelbrich & Sattler, 2014; Wang et al., 2012) may also explain the lower
performance outcomes observed. The motivation theory (Fagan et al., 2008) argues that
both extrinsic and intrinsic motivations influence human performance or capabilities.
Thus, factors, such as increased anxiety and lower confidence, may have negatively
affected the older participants’ task performance.
The study results on the workload measures also appear to reflect the cognitive,
physical, attitudinal and situational characteristics of older adults. These characteristics
can be understood as reductions in different mental and physical resources and in the
ability to cope with different stressors. Workload is defined as the discrepancy between
task demands and available resources (Hart & Staveland, 1988). Accordingly, reductions
in resources would naturally lead to increases in workload in different dimensions, as
observed in this study. The age impacts observed for all six dimensions of the NASA-
TLX suggest that such reductions in resources occur across various dimensions.
Relatedly, it is worth noting the results on the physical demand and time pressure
27 / 43
measures - they seem to confirm the importance of providing physical supports and
measures for alleviating situational stressors for older SSK users.
Effects of SSK physical design by age
Regarding the task performance measures, the significant two-way interactions of Age ×
Chair on task completion time (Figure 5a) and average reaction time (Figure 5b) indicate
that: 1) across the eight experimental trials, the younger group mostly performed the task
well in 30 seconds irrespective of physical design; 2) in contrast, the older group’s task
completion time was more dependent on the use of chairs; 3) sitting enabled the older
group to complete the task more quickly (Figure 5a) with longer reaction times (Figure
5b). In contrast, when standing, the older participants tended to perform individual touch
operations more quickly, seemingly in an attempt to reduce task completion time,
although this indeed resulted in increasing it.
Concerning the workload measures, several significant main and interaction
effects of the physical design variables were found for the mental demand (Figure 6a),
physical demand (Figure 6b), time pressure (Figures 6c and 6d), performance (Figure 6e),
frustration (Figure 6h), and weighted average workload (Figure 6i) measures. Meanwhile,
two interaction effects involving Age, that is, Age × Side Partition × Back Partition and
Age × Chair, were found for effort (Figure 6f) and frustration (Figure 6g), respectively.
Each of these interaction effects indicates that the corresponding physical design variable
or combination of physical design variables affected the workload measure only in the
older group. Overall, the results concerning the workload measures imply that 1) making
use of chairs not only benefitted reducing task completion time for the older group
28 / 43
(Figure 5a) but also decreased the weighted average workload for both age groups and
that 2) the use of side partitions and a back partition were respectively effective in terms
of improving performance and reducing time pressure, but concerning mental demand
and effort, using only either one of the two features was beneficial as compared to using
both.
As for mental demand, the Side Partition × Back Partition interaction effect
suggests that in the absence of side partitions, the condition without a back partition
resulted in a significantly higher mean mental demand score compared to the condition
with it (Figure 6a). Following the definition of social presence, that is, ‘the degree of
salience of the other’ (Short et al., 1976), the combinations of Side Partition and Back
Partition (S1B1, S1B0, S0B1, and S0B0) could be classified into three categories
representing different degrees of social exposure: S1B1 (no exposure), S1B0 and S0B1
(medium exposure), and S0B0 (full exposure). The antagonistic two-way interaction
seems to imply that the medium degree of social exposure is beneficial in terms of mental
demand compared to no or full exposure. It may be that the trade-off between anxiety
from social pressure and a feeling of isolation renders the medium exposure optimal.
Regarding physical demand, the Side Partition × Chair interaction effect indicates
that in the presence of side partitions, the sitting and standing conditions did not differ in
terms of the mean physical demand score, whereas, in the absence of side partitions, the
standing condition resulted in a significantly higher mean physical demand score than the
sitting condition (Figure 6b). It is thought that the side partitions served as visual
references that facilitated postural control during standing and that their absence,
therefore, increased the difficulty and physical workload associated with standing.
29 / 43
Related to this, Teasdale et al. (1993) reported that a decrease in the amount of available
sensory information increased the difficulty of postural control during standing, which
increased postural sway. Also, Simeonov & Hsiao (2001) and Simeonov et al. (2009)
demonstrated the effectiveness of visual references for balance improvement during
standing.
With regard to time pressure, the installation of a back partition and chairs both
decreased the perceived level of time pressure (Figures 6c and 6d). Consciously knowing
that other participants were waiting for their turns likely put time pressure on the
participants as they performed the task; the installation of a back partition is thought to
have reduced the awareness of others waiting behind. The main effect of Chair on time
pressure indicates that the participants felt less rushed when they were seated. The
concept of affordance, that is, perceivable action possibilities (Norman, 1988) may
explain this result. The presence of the chair itself may have led the participants to
perceive that they could complete the task in a more relaxed state taking ample time.
Regarding performance, the main effect of Side Partition (Figure 6e) indicates
that the sheltering of co-actors was helpful for the participants, as they felt more satisfied
with their task performance. As argued by Seta (1982), when there are co-actors, and the
tasks are identical, individuals tend to attribute any differences in performance levels to
differences in abilities. Such a tendency could increase the level of anxiety and decrease
the confidence level of a performer. It may be that the use of side partitions helped
enhance the confidence of the participants by making any self-comparison impossible.
30 / 43
As for effort, an antagonistic interaction effect between the two types of partitions
similar to that observed for mental demand was found only in the older group (Figure 6f).
The older participants felt that they put less effort into the task when they were exposed
to the medium degree of social exposure as compared to none or full. This result may
also suggest that an appropriate level of social presence minimizes perceived task
difficulty by maximizing social facilitation (Zajonc, 1965).
Concerning frustration, the significant Age × Chair interaction effect indicates
that the use of a chair decreased frustration especially in the older group (Figure 6g).
Compared with younger adults, older adults are known to allocate more attention to
postural control during standing (Lajoie et al., 1993; Lajoie et al., 1996; Remaud et al.,
2012; Lacour et al., 2008). It is thought that the older participants felt significantly less
frustration when seated than standing because sitting required less attention than
standing. The result is also in line with the age differences in physical demand (Figure
4d), thus emphasizing the need to minimize older adults' physical workload when they
perform a cognitive task.
The greater mean frustration for S0C0 than for S0C1 shown in Figure 6h also
illustrates the benefits of using a chair, especially in the absence of side partitions. This
result may be interpreted in relation to the Side Partition × Chair interaction effect on
physical demand illustrated in Figure 6b – the side partitions are thought to have served
as visual references for postural control; thus, a chair was likely more beneficial in
reducing physical demand and thus alleviating frustration in the absence of the visual
partitions.
31 / 43
Finally, regarding the weighted average workload, the main effect of Chair
indicates that the sitting condition lowered it for both groups (Figure 6i). The results
shown in Figure 6 suggest that the use of a chair reduced time pressure for both
participant groups (Figure 6d), and, for the older group, it also lowered the level of
frustration. These chair effects in combination are thought to have contributed to the
observed chair effect on weighted average workload (Figure 6i).
The benefits of a chair for older adults observed in the study are in line with past
research studies, which emphasized that postural control is not a simple interplay
between static reflexes but is rather a complex skill supervised by high-level cognitive
processes (Demanze & Michel, 2017; Remaud et al., 2012; Lacour et al., 2008). With
normal aging, based on the 'posture first' principle (Andersson et al., 2002), cognitive task
performance deteriorates during dual-task situations involving a postural and a cognitive
task. This occurs because balance is prioritized, and the maintenance of balance requires
more central processing with a greater amount of attentional resources allocated to the
postural task (Ruffieux et al., 2015; Lajoie et al., 1996). Consequently, for older adults,
minimizing the postural control demand through the use of a chair would decrease the
divided attentional costs, and, thus, would contribute to improving task performance and
lowering workload across different dual-task situations.
SSK physical design recommendations for the aged population
Overall, the study proposes two SSK design recommendations: 1) place chairs so that
older adults can operate SSK while sitting, and 2) make use of either side partitions or a
back partition to create a medium degree of social presence. The first design
32 / 43
recommendation is to help older users perform SSK tasks more quickly and with less
frustration. Also, it would well benefit users of all ages by reducing the overall workload.
The second design recommendation is to reduce workloads during the task in the mental
demand and effort dimensions.
The comparisons of the eight physical design alternatives in terms of the average
task completion time and the average accuracy and workload scores (Figure 7) also
support the design recommendations. For the older group, S1B0C1 and S0B1C1 were the
two most desirable alternatives when considering the three criteria in combination.
S1B0C1 resulted in the shortest mean task completion time (66.1s), the largest mean
number of sub-tasks completed successfully (4.3), and the second-lowest mean weighted
average workload score (2.6). Another comparable alternative, S0B1C1, resulted in the
second-shortest mean task completion time (67.0s), the second-largest mean number of
sub-tasks completed successfully (4.2), and the lowest mean weighted average workload
score (2.5). Compared to the control group where none of the physical design features
were applied (S0B0C0), S1B0C1 and S0B1C1 reduced the mean task completion time by
more than 20 seconds while increasing accuracy and reducing workload at the same time.
In order to test these differences, additional one-way repeated measures ANOVA were
conducted. Regarding the task completion time, the physical design alternative effect was
significant in the older group, and the mean task completion times of S1B0C1 and
S0B1C1 were significantly shorter than that of S0B0C0. The results overall recommend
S1B0C1 or S0B1C1.
Implications
33 / 43
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to empirically demonstrate the
difficulties experienced by older users when using SSK with both objective and
subjective data. The study results lend support to past research studies about the physical,
attitudinal and situational aspects of problems experienced by older adults, and suggest
that simple design changes that provide environmental support for declining abilities
would serve as a powerful intervention to improve the performance of older adults by
resolving the problems (Charness, 2008). If the effects of physical design were integrated
with GUI improvements, it would greatly contribute to decreasing the gap between the
younger and older groups.
Designing SSK to increase the sense of consideration felt by older users would
also encourage them to become more engaged in the technological age (Günay & Erbuğ,
2015). In general, the ability to use technology improves the independence of older adults
and their perception of the quality of life (Mynatt & Rogers, 2002). Therefore, promoting
their use of SSK through design improvements would mean more than enhanced
usability.
In addition, it should be noted that SSK design could provide benefits to the
business side. Shorter ordering times and higher accuracy levels would not only lead to
shorter cycle times and lower operational costs but would also attract more older adults
customers. Once older adults gain some positive experience with SSK, their tendency to
avoid using them would decrease, and they would more eagerly visit restaurants to reuse
SSK (Zhao et al., 2008). Therefore, small physical design modifications could help boost
many businesses' revenue levels.
34 / 43
Limitations and future work
This study was a lab experiment; thus, it is possible the actual effects of the physical
design variables in the real-world environments do not equal those reported in this study.
We expect that in actual situations with more disturbances such as different visual signs
and noises and where people are more willing to order as soon as possible to receive their
food quickly, the effects of physical design features would likely be more significant.
Observational studies in real-world settings are needed to confirm this prediction.
Currently, such an observational study is under our investigation.
Also, since the task difficulty level was controlled throughout the experiment,
investigating the impacts of task difficulty level would produce more complete
knowledge. Future studies that explore more complicated SSK tasks, such as making
payments and data entry, could help produce physical design recommendations for
different task difficulty levels. The idea of adding physical design features could also be
applied to diverse situations in which older adults must interact with different
technological systems in a public space. In addition, the results overall imply that a
medium degree of social exposure may help to control perceived difficulties of different
tasks. Further investigations on the impacts of the degree of designed social exposure on
the user experience of older adults are needed.
CONCLUSION
Through a lab experiment, this study elucidated the impacts of physical design on
workload and task performance during the use of self-service kiosks (SSK). This study
35 / 43
also developed SSK physical design recommendations for the aged population. Notably,
older adults conducted more effective touch operations and completed the SSK task more
quickly when they were seated than standing. Making use of a chair also significantly
reduced time pressure, frustration, and overall workload as evaluated using the NASA-
TLX questionnaire. Moreover, creating the medium degree of social exposure by the use
of either side or back partitions complemented the Chair effect by reducing the mean
ratings of mental demand and effort. The results suggest that a chair should be positioned
with the installation of either side partitions or a back partition to enhance the older users’
experience during the use of SSK. The current study results also present a novel approach
to bridging the digital divide. While growing technological developments and the
widespread installation of SSK may threaten older adults who are less familiar with new
technology, designing an older adults-friendly physical space around SSK would
significantly help them use SSK more effectively and thus help them become more
involved in the digital society.
KEY POINTS
 The study results demonstrated that sitting (the use of a chair) while using self-
service kiosks (SSK) would especially benefit older adults with regard to task
performance and workload levels.
 Compared to standing, sitting resulted in nearly a 10% decrease in task
completion time while also reducing workloads, including time pressure and
frustration perceived by the older group. The observed benefits of a chair may be
attributed to reduced postural control demands and divided attention costs
36 / 43
 The use of either side or back partitions complemented the chair effect; S1B0C1
and S0B1C1 resulted in about a 24% decrease in task completion time compared
to S0B0C0 in the older group. They also yielded greater numbers of sub-tasks
completed successfully and lower weighted average workload scores.
 The use of the proposed physical design recommendations would greatly help
older adults use SSK more effectively.
REFERENCES
Andersson, G., Hagman, J., Talianzadeh, R., Svedberg, A., & Larsen, H. C. (2002).
Effect of cognitive load on postural control. Brain research bulletin, 58(1), 135-139.
Argo, J. J., Dahl, D. W., & Manchanda, R. V. (2005). The influence of a mere social
presence in a retail context. Journal of consumer research, 32(2), 207-212.
Bandura, A., Freeman, W. H., & Lightsey, R. (1999). Self-efficacy: The exercise of
control.
Barnard, Y., Bradley, M. D., Hodgson, F., & Lloyd, A. D. (2013). Learning to use new
technologies by older adults: Perceived difficulties, experimentation behaviour and
usability. Computers in human behavior, 29(4), 1715-1724.
Bitner, M. J., Brown, S. W., & Meuter, M. L. (2000). Technology infusion in service
encounters. Journal of the Academy of marketing Science, 28(1), 138-149.
Blut, M., Wang, C., & Schoefer, K. (2016). Factors influencing the acceptance of self-
service technologies: A meta-analysis. Journal of Service Research, 19(4), 396-416.
Caprani, N., O’Connor, N. E., & Gurrin, C. (2012). Touch screens for the older user.
Assistive technologies, 95-118.
Cerella, J. (1985). Information processing rates in older adults. Psychological bulletin,
98(1), 67.
Cerella, J., Poon, L. W., & Fozard, J. L. (1982). Age and iconic read-out. Journal of
Gerontology, 37(2), 197-202.
Chan, C. C., Wong, A. W., Lee, T. M., & Chi, I. (2009). Modified automatic teller
machine prototype for older adults: A case study of participative approach to
inclusive design. Applied Ergonomics, 40(2), 151-160.
37 / 43
Charness, N. (2008). Aging and human performance. Human factors, 50(3), 548-555.
Charness, N., Champion, M., & Yordon, R. (2010). Designing products for older
consumers: A human factors perspective. The aging consumer: Perspectives from
psychology and economics, 249-268.
Chourasia, A. O., Wiegmann, D. A., Chen, K. B., Irwin, C. B., & Sesto, M. E. (2013).
Effect of sitting or standing on touch screen performance and touch characteristics.
Human Factors, 55(4), 789-802.
Colle, H. A., & Hiszem, K. J. (2004). Standing at a kiosk: Effects of key size and spacing
on touch screen numeric keypad performance and user preference. Ergonomics,
47(13), 1406-1423.
Craik, F. I., & McDowd, J. M. (1987). Age differences in recall and recognition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13(3), 474.
Czaja, S. J. (1996). Aging and the acquisition of computer skills. Aging and skilled
performance: Advances in theory and applications, 201-220.
Czaja, S. J., Boot, W. R., Charness, N., & Rogers, W. A. (2019). Designing for older
adults: Principles and creative human factors approaches. CRC press.
Dabholkar, P. A. (1996). Consumer evaluations of new technology-based self-service
options: an investigation of alternative models of service quality. International
Journal of research in Marketing, 13(1), 29-51.
Dabholkar, P. A., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2002). An attitudinal model of technology-based
self-service: moderating effects of consumer traits and situational factors. Journal of
the academy of marketing science, 30(3), 184-201.
Dean, D. H. (2008). Shopper age and the use of self‐service technologies. Managing
Service Quality: An International Journal.
Deary, I. J., Corley, J., Gow, A. J., Harris, S. E., Houlihan, L. M., Marioni, R. E., ... &
Starr, J. M. (2009). Age-associated cognitive decline. British medical bulletin, 92(1),
135-152.
Demanze Laurence, B., & Michel, L. (2017). The fall in older adults: physical and
cognitive problems. Current aging science, 10(3), 185-200.
Dianat, I., Molenbroek, J., & Castellucci, H. I. (2018). A review of the methodology and
applications of anthropometry in ergonomics and product design. Ergonomics,
61(12), 1696-1720.
38 / 43
Fagan, M. H., Neill, S., & Wooldridge, B. R. (2008). Exploring the intention to use
computers: An empirical investigation of the role of intrinsic motivation, extrinsic
motivation, and perceived ease of use. Journal of Computer Information Systems,
48(3), 31-37.
Fang, M. L., Canham, S. L., Battersby, L., Sixsmith, J., Wada, M., & Sixsmith, A.
(2019). Exploring privilege in the digital divide: implications for theory, policy, and
practice. The Gerontologist, 59(1), e1-e15.
Gao, Q., & Sun, Q. (2015). Examining the usability of touch screen gestures for older and
younger adults. Human factors, 57(5), 835-863.
Gelbrich, K., & Sattler, B. (2014). Anxiety, crowding, and time pressure in public self-
service technology acceptance. Journal of Services Marketing.
Günay, A., & Erbuğ, Ç. (2015). Eliciting positive user experiences with self-service
kiosks: pursuing possibilities. Behaviour & Information Technology, 34(1), 81-93.
Hagen, S., & Sandnes, F. E. (2010). Toward accessible self-service kiosks through
intelligent user interfaces. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 14(8), 715-721.
Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index):
Results of empirical and theoretical research. In Advances in psychology (Vol. 52,
pp. 139-183). North-Holland.
Hawthorn, D. (2000). Possible implications of aging for interface designers. Interacting
with computers, 12(5), 507-528.
Hill, R., Betts, L. R., & Gardner, S. E. (2015). Older adults’ experiences and perceptions
of digital technology:(Dis) empowerment, wellbeing, and inclusion. Computers in
Human Behavior, 48, 415-423.
Hwangbo, H., Yoon, S. H., Jin, B. S., Han, Y. S., & Ji, Y. G. (2013). A study of pointing
performance of older adults users on smartphones. International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, 29(9), 604-618.
Iancu, I., & Iancu, B. (2017). Older adults in the digital era. theoretical perspectives on
assistive technologies. Technologies, 5(3), 60.
Jin, Z. X., Plocher, T., & Kiff, L. (2007, July). Touch screen user interfaces for older
adults: button size and spacing. In International Conference on Universal Access in
Human \Computer Interaction (pp. 933-941). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Kauffman, R. J., & Lally, L. (1994). A value platform analysis perspective on customer
access information technology. Decision Sciences, 25(5‐6), 767-794.
39 / 43
Kim, J. H., Aulck, L., Thamsuwan, O., Bartha, M. C., & Johnson, P. W. (2014). The
effect of key size of touch screen virtual keyboards on productivity, usability, and
typing biomechanics. Human factors, 56(7), 1235-1248.
Kiosk Marketplace (2019) 2019 Kiosk Marketplace Census Report.
Lacour, M., Bernard-Demanze, L., & Dumitrescu, M. (2008). Posture control, aging, and
attention resources: models and posture-analysis methods. Neurophysiologie
Clinique/Clinical Neurophysiology, 38(6), 411-421.
Lajoie, Y., Teasdale, N., Bard, C., & Fleury, M. (1993). Attentional demands for static
and dynamic equilibrium. Experimental brain research, 97(1), 139-144.
Lajoie, Y., Teasdale, N., Bard, C., & Fleury, M. (1996). Upright standing and gait: are
there changes in attentional requirements related to normal aging?. Experimental
aging research, 22(2), 185-198.
Lee, C., & Coughlin, J. F. (2015). PERSPECTIVE: Older adults' adoption of technology:
an integrated approach to identifying determinants and barriers. Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 32(5), 747-759.
Lee, S., & Zhai, S. (2009, April). The performance of touch screen soft buttons. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp.
309-318).
Lewis, C. (1986). A model of mental model construction. ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, 17(4),
306-313.
Maguire, M. C. (1999). A review of user-interface design guidelines for public
information kiosk systems. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 50(3),
263-286.
Mäkinen, E., Patomäki, S., & Raisamo, R. (2002, October). Experiences on a multimodal
information kiosk with an interactive agent. In Proceedings of the second Nordic
conference on Human-computer interaction (pp. 275-278).
Markets and Markets. (2020, Feb) Interactive Kiosk Market by Offering (Hardware and
Software & Services), Type (Bank Kiosks, Self-service Kiosks, and Vending
Kiosks), Location (Indoor and Outdoor), Panel Size (17”-32” and Above 32”),
Vertical, and Region - Global Forecast to 2025.
Marquié, J. C., Jourdan-Boddaert, L., & Huet, N. (2002). Do older adults underestimate
their actual computer knowledge?. Behaviour & Information Technology, 21(4),
273-280.
40 / 43
Marsh, A. P., & Geel, S. E. (2000). The effect of age on the attentional demands of
postural control. Gait & posture, 12(2), 105-113.
Meuter, M. L., & Bitner, M. J. (1998). Self-service technologies: extending service
frameworks and identifying issues for research. In American marketing association.
Conference proceedings (Vol. 9, p. 12). American Marketing Association.
Miller, 2019; https://modernrestaurantmanagement.com/ensuring-an-accessible-kiosk-
experience/
Motti, L. G., Vigouroux, N., & Gorce, P. (2013, November). Interaction techniques for
older adults using touchscreen devices: a literature review. In Proceedings of the
25th Conference on l'Interaction Homme-Machine (pp. 125-134).
Murata, A., & Iwase, H. (2005). Usability of touch-panel interfaces for older adults.
Human factors, 47(4), 767-776.
Mynatt, E. D., & Rogers, W. A. (2001). Developing technology to support the functional
independence of older adults. Ageing International, 27(1), 24-41.
Niculescu, A. I., Yeo, K. H., & Banchs, R. E. (2016, October). Designing muse: a
multimodal user experience for a shopping mall kiosk. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Human Agent Interaction (pp. 273-275).
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things. Basic books.
Park, 2019; http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20190213000567
Peral-Peral, B., Villarejo-Ramos, Á. F., & Arenas-Gaitán, J. (2019). Self-efficacy and
anxiety as determinants of older adults’ use of Internet Banking Services. Universal
Access in the Information Society, 1-16.
Phillips, L. W., & Sternthal, B. (1977). Age differences in information processing: a
perspective on the aged consumer. Journal of Marketing Research, 14(4), 444-457.
Phiriyapokanon, T. (2011). Is a big button interface enough for older adults users?:
Towards user interface guidelines for older adults users.
Plumert, J. M., & Schwebel, D. C. (1997). Social and temperamental influences on
children's overestimation of their physical abilities: Links to accidental injuries.
Journal of experimental child psychology, 67(3), 317-337.
Poulter, 2017; https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-5105995/Older adults-shoppers-
self-service-checkouts-intimidating.html
41 / 43
Rabbitt, P. (2019). 1 An age-decrement in the ability to ignore irrelevant information.
Cognitive Development and the Ageing Process: Selected works of Patrick Rabbitt,
5.
Ranganathan, V. K., Siemionow, V., Sahgal, V., & Yue, G. H. (2001). Effects of aging
on hand function. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 49, 1478–1484.
doi:10.1046/j.1532- 5415.2001.4911240.x
Rastegary, H., & Landy, F. J. (1993). The interactions among time urgency, uncertainty,
and time pressure. In Time pressure and stress in human judgment and decision
making (pp. 217-239). Springer, Boston, MA.
Remaud, A., Boyas, S., Caron, G. A., & Bilodeau, M. (2012). Attentional demands
associated with postural control depend on task difficulty and visual condition.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 44(5), 329-340.
Rosen, L. D., Whaling, K., Carrier, L. M., Cheever, N. A., & Rokkum, J. (2013). The
media and technology usage and attitudes scale: An empirical investigation.
Computers in human behavior, 29(6), 2501-2511.
Ruffieux, J., Keller, M., Lauber, B., & Taube, W. (2015). Changes in standing and
walking performance under dual-task conditions across the lifespan. Sports
Medicine, 45(12), 1739-1758.
Salomann, H., Kolbe, L., & Brenner, W. (2006). Self-services in customer relationships:
balancing high-tech and high-touch today and tomorrow. E-Service, 4(2), 65-84.
Schedlbauer, M. J. (2007). Effects of key size and spacing on the completion time and
accuracy of input tasks on soft keypads using trackball and touch input. In
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 51st Annual Meeting
(pp. 429–433). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Schedlbauer, M. J., Pastel, R. L., & Heines, J. M. (2006). Effect of posture on target
acquisition with a trackball and touch screen. In 28th International Conference on
Information Technology Interfaces (pp. 257–262). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer
Society.
Seifert, A., Hofer, M., & Rössel, J. (2018). Older adults’ perceived sense of social
exclusion from the digital world. Educational Gerontology, 44(12), 775-785.
Sesto, M. E., Irwin, C. B., Chen, K. B., Chourasia, A. O., & Wiegmann, D. A. (2012).
Effect of touch screen button size and spacing on touch characteristics of users with
and without disabilities. Human Factors, 54(3), 425-436.
Seta, J. J. (1982). The impact of comparison processes on coactors' task performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42(2), 281.
42 / 43
Sharma, R., Nah, F. F. H., Sharma, K., Katta, T. S. S. S., Pang, N., & Yong, A. (2016,
July). Smart living for older adults: design and human-computer interaction
considerations. In International Conference on Human Aspects of IT for the Aged
Population (pp. 112-122). Springer, Cham.
Short, J., et al, 1976, The Social Psychology of Telecommunications, John Wiley,
London, United Kingdom.
Simeonov, P., & Hsiao, H. (2001). Height, surface firmness, and visual reference effects
on balance control. Injury Prevention, 7(suppl 1), i50-i53.
Simeonov, P., Hsiao, H., & Hendricks, S. (2009). Effectiveness of vertical visual
reference for reducing postural instability on inclined and compliant surfaces at
elevation. Applied ergonomics, 40(3), 353-361.
Simon, F., & Usunier, J. C. (2007). Cognitive, demographic, and situational determinants
of service customer preference for personnel-in-contact over self-service technology.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 24(2), 163-173.
Teasdale, N., Bard, C., LaRue, J., & Fleury, M. (1993). On the cognitive penetrability of
posture control. Experimental aging research, 19(1), 1-13.
Tsai, W. C., & Lee, C. F. (2009, July). A study on the icon feedback types of small touch
screen for older adults. In International Conference on Universal Access in Human-
Computer Interaction (pp. 422-431). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Van Dijk, J. A. (2006). Digital divide research, achievements and shortcomings. Poetics,
34(4-5), 221-235.
Verhaeghen, P., Steitz, D. W., Sliwinski, M. J., & Cerella, J. (2003). Aging and dual-task
performance: a meta-analysis. Psychology and aging, 18(3), 443.
Walker, R. H., & Johnson, L. W. (2006). Why consumers use and do not use technology-
enabled services. Journal of services Marketing, 20(2), 125-135.
Walsh, D. A., & Prasse, M. J. Iconic memory and attentional processes in the aged. In L.
W. Poon, J. L. Fozard, L. S. Cermak, D. Arenberg, & L. W. Thompson (Eds.), New
directions in memory and aging: Proceedings of the George A. Talland memorial
conference. Erlbaum Assoc, Hillsdale, NJ, 1980.
Wang, C. (2017). Consumer acceptance of self-service technologies: an ability–
willingness model. International Journal of Market Research, 59(6), 787-802.
Wang, C., Harris, J., & Patterson, P. G. (2012). Customer choice of self‐service
technology: the roles of situational influences and past experience. Journal of Service
Management.
43 / 43
Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149(3681), 269-274.
Zhao, X., Mattila, A. S., & Tao, L. S. E. (2008). The role of post‐training self‐efficacy in
customers' use of self service technologies. International Journal of Service Industry
Management.
Biographies
Hyesun Chung is currently a graduate student researcher in Industrial Engineering at
Seoul National University in Seoul, South Korea. She received her bachelor's degrees in
science in industrial engineering, fine arts in design, and business administration from
Seoul National University.
Woojin Park is currently a professor in Industrial Engineering at Seoul National
University in Seoul, South Korea. He received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in Industrial
Engineering from POSTECH and Ph.D. degree in industrial and operations engineering
from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
