Designing Clinical AAC Tablet Applications with Adults
who have Mild Intellectual Disabilities
Ryan Colin Gibson
Uni. of Strathclyde
Glasgow, UK
ryan.gibson@strath.ac.uk
Mark D. Dunlop
Uni. of Strathclyde
Glasgow, UK
mark.dunlop@strath.ac.uk
Matt-Mouley Bouamrane
Uni. of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
Matt.Bouamrane@ed.ac.uk
Revathy Nayar
Uni. of Strathclyde
Glasgow, UK
revathy.nayar@strath.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Patients with mild intellectual disabilities (ID) face
significant communication barriers within primary care
services. This has a detrimental effect on the quality of
treatment being provided, meaning the consultation process
could benefit from augmentative and alternative
communication (AAC) technologies. However, little
research has been conducted in this area beyond that of
paper-based aids. We address this by extracting design
requirements for a clinical AAC tablet application from
n=10 adults with mild ID. Our results show that such
technologies can promote communication between general
practitioners (GPs) and patients with mild ID by extracting
symptoms in advance of the consultation via an accessible
questionnaire. These symptoms act as a referent and assist
in raising the awareness of conditions commonly
overlooked by GPs. Furthermore, the application can
support people with ID in identifying and accessing
healthcare services. Finally, the participants identified 6
key factors that affect the clarity of medical images.
Author Keywords
Intellectual Disabilities; Primary Health Care;
Augmentative and Alternative Communication;
Accessibility; Mobile Applications
CSS Concepts
• Human-centered computing ~ Accessibility
technologies • Human-centered computing ~ User
centered design • Social and professional topics ~ Health
information exchanges
INTRODUCTION
Medical professionals are increasingly overworked [1, 2],
which impacts their ability to seek out further training
opportunities to enhance their skillset. This is problematic
in the context of healthcare for people with intellectual
disabilities (IDs), since medical schools often deliver highly
variable and somewhat limited content regarding this
population [3]. As a result, practitioners are apprehensive
about their ability to treat patients with ID and are unaware
of their specific health and communication needs [4].
This has a negative impact on both the length and quality of
life of such patients. For example, a 2013 inquiry into the
premature deaths of people with ID concluded that circa
50% of the 247 cases examined were avoidable, with 27.5%
of these directly attributable to better quality health care [5].
Furthermore, each patient suffered from an average of five
long-term / treatable conditions at their time of death, many
of which are straightforward to diagnose and cure e.g.
constipation was found in 37% of these cases.
Communication has been identified as a significant barrier
to accessing effective health services for people with ID.
[5–9]. Yet despite its importance in providing optimal care
[10], medical professionals often find it difficult to adjust
their consultation styles to cater to the complex needs of
patients with ID [4, 8, 9]. Given the intense workload
pressures previously described [1, 2], General Practitioners
(GPs) are unable to invest the time required to increase their
knowledge in this area. Digital technologies therefore
become an important resource for supporting effective
communication between GPs and the ID population.
However, their use in this context remains vastly under-
researched in comparison to other domains such as [11–13].
We address this gap by investigating the implementation of
tablet applications to promote communication between
patients with mild ID and GPs. This was approached from
the perspective of patients since their crucial views have
been omitted in other studies [14–16]. Three user-centered
design workshops (UCD), involving ten adults with mild
ID, were conducted to decipher the participants
requirements for the proposed tablet application, along with
their current use of alternative and augmentative
communication (AAC) technologies. Such technologies are
used to enhance an individual with disabilities capacity to
communicate by offering those who cannot speak a
platform to convey their needs (alternative), or by
supplementing the vocabulary of those who can
(augmentative) [17]. The results obtained enabled us to
answer the following two research questions:
RQ1: What range of technologies are patients with mild ID
using to assist them in communicating with GPs?
RQ2: What do patients with mild ID require from a tablet
application to support them in communicating with a GP?
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others
than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2020, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA.
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04…$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376159
We therefore contribute to the field of HCI by establishing
a set of design requirements to assist in the future
development of clinical AAC applications for adults with
mild ID. In addition, we provide guidance on the use of
mobile technologies to improve healthcare services for
people with communication impairments, by building on
the findings of [12–15, 18].
BACKGROUND
In this work, we consider ID using the World Health
Organization (WHO) definition [19]: “[they have] a
significantly reduced ability to understand new or complex
information and to learn and apply new skills (impaired
intelligence). This results in a reduced ability to cope
independently (impaired social functioning), and begins
before adulthood, with a lasting effect on development.”
The severity of an individual’s ID can range from mild to
severe. People with mild ID can generally conduct
everyday tasks without support but tend to struggle with
those that are unfamiliar or more complex. Consequently,
we believe this population could benefit significantly from
a clinical AAC application, since such technologies can
augment their vocabulary and language skills whilst they
are interacting with a GP. This view is also supported by
the medical professionals, support workers and academics
included in the literature by Gibson et al. [14–16]
Non-Digital Communication Aids
Paper-based AAC resources are a common form of support
utilized by people with ID. As such, several of these have
been adapted for use within the clinical domain.
Patient Passports
Patient passports [20] encapsulates an individual’s personal
profile (e.g. their environmental, medical or communication
needs) to support practitioners in providing patient-centered
care. Nevertheless, to be used effectively, medical
professionals must possess the skills required to meet the
complex needs of a patient. In addition, Northway et al.
[11] found that the availability of passports, and the content
included within them, varied widely across health centers.
Consequently, their overall benefit is reduced as there is no
guarantee that the information provided will be utilized
effectively by staff, or whether the same passport can be
used throughout the healthcare system.
Talking Mats™
Talking Mats™ [21] is a resource utilized by people with
communication impairments to discuss difficult subjects in
greater depth. The user provides their opinion by placing
images (relating to options) under the relevant section of a
visual scaled embedded within a textured mat. Bell and
Cameron [22] used the Talking Mats™ framework to
determine the mental health status of a patient with mild ID.
This enabled the patient to supply their views whilst
avoiding the social pressures that may arise when directly
interacting with a health professional [22]. Consequently,
the quality of the information provided increased, which led
to a successful diagnosis being carried out. However, the
framework requires a large amount of modification for use
within different contexts, due to its reliance on images.
Digital Communication Aids
The use of digital communication aids to support patients
with ID in other areas of the healthcare system has also
been investigated extensively.
Dentistry
Menzies et al. [18] developed a computer-based tool to
support patients who have ID in communicating with dental
practitioners. They found that the aid could improve
consultations in three main ways: (1) presenting images and
videos of dental procedures prior to the appointment, to
increase the patient’s understanding of what may occur; (2)
providing staff with access to the patient’s personal
preferences to assist in building a rapport with the
individual; and (3) presenting information in the format
most appropriate to the patient’s needs.
Secondary Care
Prior et al. [12, 13] also placed emphasis on the use of
patient passports when developing an extended, digital
version for secondary care services. Their system is
centered on customization to ensure it is appropriate to the
patient’s clinical and accessibility needs. As such, the
patient may select from a variety of input methods and is
only required to answer a subset of the questionnaire, based
on aspects such as their age and gender. 3 image sets were
also implemented to increase the user’s comprehension of
the question being asked, along with the ability to switch
between these sets at any time [13]. This system therefore
provides several advantages over the paper-based resource
since it prioritizes certain aspects of an individual’s care
and stores the emerging results in a centralized location.
Mental Health
In the work most similar to our own, Boström and Eriksson
explored the use of tablet technologies to support children
with ID in self-reporting their psychological health [23].
They employed user-centered design techniques to develop
a 43-question survey across five topics of an individual’s
mental health. A quantitative study was used to measure
the accessibility of this questionnaire, with 109 of the 113
participants involved able to answer all questions without
support and with limited signs of response bias [24].
Finally, to ensure the results of the questionnaire matched
the views of the user, a mixed methods study was carried
out with ten children who have mild ID [25]. Boström and
Broberg found a good level of agreement between these
results and the views provided by the participants during a
series of semi-structured interviews. Nevertheless, some of
the more negative experiences described were not picked up
by the questionnaire, and this was attributed to such aspects
being omitted from the app [25].
Boström et al’s work [23–25] indicates that a digital
questionnaire can be an accessible resource for extracting
reliable data from people with ID. This data may then be
used to open up a discussion on how the patient is feeling
and ultimately lead to medical professionals carrying out
better informed care decisions [24]. As such, there is ample
opportunity to explore how these technologies may be
employed within primary care, since the aforementioned
paper-based aids [11, 20–22] have several limitations.
METHODOLOGY
To ensure the proposed tablet application is developed
systematically, we have employed the Medical Research
Council’s framework for complex interventions [26]. The
study presented in this paper adheres to the “Development”
phase since its focus is on establishing how the application
can fit into and improve current practice. Determining
whether improvements have been achieved at multiple
stages throughout a project is well-suited to highly
heterogeneous populations, as it may be initially difficult to
gather requirements from such stakeholders. In addition,
the framework is widely accepted throughout the medical
domain. Therefore, developing the app using this approach
increases the likelihood that it is usable by people with mild
ID and is embedded within current practice.
How the app can improve primary care consultations was
established by extracting design requirements from ten
adults with mild ID across three UCD design workshops.
The design tasks implemented are described in the
“Procedure” subsection and aimed to address three aspects
deemed crucial to the implementation of AAC
technologies: (1) their overall functionality (2) the layout
and design of each screen; and (3) images that capture the
options presented, since people with ID have difficulty
understanding complex concepts and have lower literacy
skills than the general population [12–16, 18, 27–30].
UCD Workshops - Participants
Four ID charities throughout Scotland were contacted via
email and telephone to assist in identifying participants who
adhered to the inclusion criteria for the study. These
criteria were comprised of: adults aged between 18 and 60
(to reduce the presence of age relate cognitive diseases)
who have mild ID only; individuals who can communicate
via speech (including with the use of AAC devices) and can
understand verbal partners; and those with the visual
capabilities to process images.
Based on the recommendations of the experts involved in
[16], the charities were asked to recruit between 4 and 6
participants per workshop. Easy read information sheets
were then disseminated to potential candidates to enable
them to gain an understanding of what the workshop
entails, with an in-depth version being sent to their
caregiver to promote discussion. Potential participants
were invited to take part if they could demonstrate their
ability to provide informed consent, by answering the six
questions proposed by Horner-Johnson & Bailey [31].
Participant ID Gender Age
1.1, 1.2 F, M 41, 29
2.1 to 2.5 M, M, F, F, M -
3.1, to 3.3 F, F, M 28, 29
Table 1. A description of the participants demographics.
Three UCD workshops were carried out between the
months of August 2018 and July 2019 in the cities of
Glasgow and Edinburgh. Four individuals consented to
take part in workshop one; however, two dropped out
unexpectedly on the day. Five participated in workshop
two, with a further one dropping out and three took part in
workshop three (see table 1 for demographics). Each had
an unspecified range of disability that adhered to WHO’s
definition of mild ID. Further information regarding their
etiologies was not collected as we felt it was inappropriate
to ask the participants about the nature of their disability.
The final n size therefore adhered to the recommendations
of Doyle to gain a diversity of views that lead towards
saturation [32]. One charity facilitator was present during
each workshop to assist the lead author in solving any
challenges that arose.
UCD Workshops – Procedure
Before each workshop commenced, the participants were
briefed on the structure of the study and had any concerns
addressed by the lead author. They were then required to
sign an easy read consent form, before engaging in an ice-
breaker session to help them feel at ease with their peers.
The four tasks shown in Figure 1, were then presented for
completion, with these tasks previously being adjusted
(with the help of experts in ID) to cater to the accessibility
needs of the participants [16].
Figure 1. The tasks completed by participants with mild ID.
Task one consisted of a focus group to explore the
participants experiences with primary care and determine
how technology can support them within this environment.
The questions presented were developed using accessible
language guidelines and were primarily open-ended to
promote discussion. The topics centered on 4 main themes:
preparing for consultations; positive and negative
communication encounters with GPs; their use of AAC
devices; and how technology can improve consultations.
Additionally, the key concepts discussed were captured in
real-time via the use of sticky notes (like [33]), and
subsequently presented in full view of the group. This
enabled them to challenge any misconceptions made by the
lead investigator and assisted in overcoming short-term
memory impairments.
During task two, the participants were required to develop
two images boards [33] that captured their opinions on the
clarity of medical images. Each individual first critiqued a
set of pictures before separating them into two categories:
those that accurately represent the symptom conveyed; and
those whose meaning is more obscure. A group discussion
then occurred on why some images were clearer than
others, before being placed on the appropriate board. All
images were accompanied by a short textual description to
ensure the participants knew what it was trying to depict.
Task three involved developing a paper prototype to
establish the patient’s views on how the proposed
application should function. They were required to place
mock-up objects onto a paper representation of a tablet and
position them according to their needs. These objects
included general usability features, such as skip buttons, as
well as those more specific to the proposed application.
Blank objects were also included to allow participants to
incorporate elements unforeseen by the authors.
In task four, the participants were required to evaluate a
digital prototype of the application, developed using
guidelines disseminated by experts in ID. [14, 15] This
enabled us to discern requirements that had not been
identified during task three (without initially biasing the
participants views), since there is evidence to suggest that
people with ID become more engaged when interacting
with digital prototypes [34]. They had to select various
symptoms using the application (without assistance) and
any areas of uncertainty were noted. Once completed, the
lead investigator prompted for an explanation of the
participants thoughts during their uncertainty, as well as the
areas of the application they liked and disliked.
Comfort breaks were administered between each task, with
the participants being reminded of their right to withdraw
during this time frame. Each workshop lasted
approximately 3 hours, at which point the participants were
debriefed on the initial results obtained and reimbursed for
the travel expenses they had incurred. They also received a
£5 lunch voucher for their participation. All studies were
conducted under ethical approval from the Department of
Computer and Information Sciences ethics committee,
University of Strathclyde (ID: 915).
UCD Workshops – Analysis
Tasks one to four were audio recorded with participant
consent and transcribed verbatim by the lead investigator to
familiarize themselves with the data. Task one was then
subjected to a framework analysis [35], with an initial
thematic framework being developed by the first author
using the concepts captured within the aforementioned
sticky notes. This framework was used to tag the
transcripts, with additional codes being developed where
necessary. Author four subsequently reviewed the tagged
transcripts and any discrepancies were resolved, at which
point similar codes were grouped together to form themes.
Consequently, a structured summary of the barriers faced
by the participants within the clinical context, as well as the
strategies used to mitigate these barriers, was produced.
Task four underwent a similar analysis process except that
the initial framework was developed by the lead author
during the familiarization stage. This enabled us to gauge
aspects of the prototype that were accessible to adults with
mild ID, as well as those that may hinder the
communication process.
During task two, the participants were required to group
logically related images together whilst forming the
(un)clear boards. For example, images that depicted the
wrong facial expressions were placed in a similar area on
the unclear board. The groupings that emerged were then
tagged using phrases suggested by the participants and
subsequently combined to form overarching themes. These
themes enabled us to provide guidance on the development
of medical images for people with mild ID.
During task three, the lead investigator proceeded to tag
each distinct feature produced by the participants. These
features were then transferred to a spreadsheet, which
included a column detailing the number of workshops in
which they were discussed. As such, we were able to sort it
by the frequency column, thus giving developers an idea of
the requirements prioritized by adults with mild ID.
RESULTS
We will now discuss the primary results that emerged
across the four tasks. The requirements in which these
results translated to may be found in Tables 2 and 3.
Task One – Focus Group
Throughout the focus groups the participants discussed
several barriers they face when attempting to access
effective healthcare services. In addition, they introduced
the various technical and non-technical strategies used to
mitigate such barriers.
Access to Healthcare Services
The participants experience with primary care practices
varied widely. For example, Participant (P) 2.1 had only
attended in recent months to undergo their yearly ID health
check, whilst others had made regular appointments to
manage chronic conditions or mental illnesses (Ps 1.2, 2.1,
2.3, 3.2 & 3.3). Despite this range, all reported
experiencing barriers when accessing services from their
GP, the most prevalent of which was the availability of
appointments. P2.3 revealed that it can take up to 3 weeks
to arrange a consultation within her practice, leading to
detrimental effects on both their mental health and ailment:
“For a normal appointment you’ve got to know three weeks
in advance what you’ve got… if there’s not an appointment
for 3 weeks you could be worrying unnecessarily till you
find out whether it’s something serious or whatever.”
This waiting period is prolonged even further if the patient
requests to be treated by their preferred GP within their
practice – see section “Practicing GP.” Nevertheless, due to
the seriousness of their condition, Ps 1.1 to 2.3 have had to
settle for treatment by doctors they are unfamiliar with.
This has led to P1.1 falsely claiming that their condition is
an emergency to ensure they receive a timely appointment
with their favored practitioner.
The participants also reported a large variance in the
organizational procedures used to disseminate information
and book appointments. Furthermore, these procedures
were often static, with employees unable to adjust the
methods used to meet the needs of a patient with ID, as
described by P3.3: “I got my [diabetes] diagnosis over the
phone which more or less just didn’t work. There was no
face to face sort of contact, and it ended up me just
basically ignoring my diabetes for quite a few years. There
wasn’t really much in the way of clear communication.”
Finally, the participants also indicated that they were not
always aware of their need to see a doctor and instead rely
on family members to facilitate this process. Nevertheless,
they often withhold crucial information regarding their
health, as they do not want to overburden their loved ones:
P1.2:“My family do a lot of caring work, so to give them
information that I’m not well then I’m probably going to
feel a little bit over[whelmed]..A family member says “right
you need a doctor” and that’s about it [for preparation].”
Practicing GP
The participants had conflicting views regarding the quality
of care received from their GP, which often leads to them
dealing exclusively with certain doctors. Their complaints
largely centered on the lack of adjustments being made by a
medical professional to accommodate their specific needs.
Terminology was a major factor in this, with the GP
regularly employing complex terms, or language
inappropriate to the patient’s level of ID: P3.2: “Because I
speak so well doctors think that I understand more than
what I do…and I’m like “what? Can you simplify that?””
P2.3: “If they see the word learning difficulty, they just
think that’s it, obviously they’ve got the mental capacity of
a two-and-a-half-year-old so I’ll just talk to her like that
when there is different levels.”
Furthermore, the participants felt that some medical
professionals lacked empathy towards their situations. This
meant that an insufficient amount of time and effort was
expended on diagnosing the health complaints made, which
may ultimately lead to dire consequences: P2.3: “I just felt
that they weren’t interested. They were running late, and
they were just wanting me in and out the door. They weren’t
interested in sort of me or what was wrong with me. Which
luckily, if I was somebody that didn’t have kids that was on
the brink, that could have serious repercussions”
In contrast, the positive experiences discussed by the
participants centered on their preferred GPs ability to meet
their complex needs. Language was also a major part of
this, with the medical professional being aware of the best
way to communicate with the patient, whilst breaking
complex concepts into simpler terms: P1.2: “They don’t
use the complicated language or if they do they then say it
in simpler terms for you as well.” P2.3: “He sort of asked
loads of questions but, like, it was simple short questions, it
wasn’t a case of big long winded [sentences].”
Being treated by the same doctor also helped the
participants to establish a relationship with a figure who is
often seen as authoritative. This assists in easing anxiety
issues and in turn enables the patient to be more open about
their health conditions. Additionally, people with ID are
more prone to developing a vast range of diseases than the
general population [5]. As such, their medical histories can
become complex meaning it may be difficult for GPs
unfamiliar with the patient to perform a correct diagnosis.
P2.5: “If you get to use the same doctor, you get friendly
with them and they get friendly with you, so you are able to
speak to them more.” P3.2: “I can go to the GP without my
mum because she knows me that well. I’ve got the
confidence to not go with support…I try and see the same
doctor for anxiety reasons but also for the doctor’s sake
cause my history is so complicated.”
Time
The amount of time afforded for appointments was also
reported to be a major barrier that effects the quality of
consultations. Less than half of the participants (P2.3, 3.1,
3.2 & 3.3) would adequately prepare for an upcoming
consultation and those who would, found it difficult to
cover all aspects they wished to: P3.1: “Sometimes I have
questions, but the problem is you don’t get very long in the
GP…You try to get all those questions [answered] in the
ten minutes, it’s quite a struggle.”
In addition, the participants believe that time constraints
prevent medical professionals from thoroughly exploring all
routes leading to the cause of a symptom, including
familiarizing themselves with the patient’s history: P2.4:
“You go in and you talk about what you want and then they
get up and open the door and you’re just told that’s it, it’s
time to leave”P1.2: “They just don’t have time to read your
record. They go in and they say, “well what’s wrong with
you” [participant] “Oh I’ve got….” [doctor] “oh we’ll
give you Co-dydramol.””
Consequently, patients with ID could benefit from double
appointments. Yet when probed on this, only P3.2 revealed
that they regularly use such an option, with the rest unaware
of their right to do so. This suggests that practices are not
adhering to international guidelines on consultation length
e.g. [36]; nevertheless, there were some GPs willing to
overextend on appointments to ensure their patients had all
concerns addressed: P1.2: “If I’m having trouble with my
diabetes then the doctor that I go to see in the practice, he
makes time. He’ll deliberately go behind his schedule so
that he can make sure that everything is back okay and, you
know, figure out why I’m having trouble with my diabetes.”
Support
Surprisingly, the majority of participants reported that they
attend GP appointments with support workers, despite
previously indicating they value their privacy. This may
suggest that their willingness to share personal issues with
paid caregivers differs from that of their family members to
limit the amount of stress placed on loved ones. The
primary responsibility of the caregiver was to act as an
intermediary between the patient and GP to ensure the
stakeholders understood what was being communicated.
This was particularly true during appointments of a
complex nature. P2.3: As soon as they found out I had
learning difficulties and I started taking my support worker
they explained more to my support worker. So even if I
didn’t get it then and there, when I went away, she’s going
to explain it in a way I would understand.
In contrast, P2.4 and P3.2 reported having negative
experiences, as they felt their own views had less value in
comparison to the caregivers. P3.2: [When my] mums tried
to support me it’s like “well have you asked this or what
can we do for this” and I’m like just sitting listening. If I’m
on my own I will have the guts to sort of say “what’s this or
why are we doing this or would this be helpful,” like I will
ask the questions. I think my mum sort of has the best
intentions but she kind of overrules a little bit. Finally, P2.2
requires support during consultations but cutbacks in
funding meant this was not feasible.
Technological Aids
The participants reported a high usage of memory aids (pen
and paper) to support them in recalling facts that require
further scrutiny out with the consultation. Strikingly, this
contrasted with their use of AAC technologies, with only
P3.2 having utilized a form of patient passports in the past.
Nevertheless, all participants felt that a digital aid could
assist both themselves and patients with other/more severe
disabilities to better prepare for a consultation, thus
enabling them to communicate effectively with GPs: P1.2:
“It [the app] should gather symptoms and then send them
to the GP. [Because] for us with mild learning disabilities,
sometimes we find it difficult to describe symptoms.
Thinking about physical disabilities it’s also a good idea
because with a tablet it [would] quite literally be a case of
boom into the doctors, right this is what it is…right that’s a
chest infection, here’s some antibiotics.”
One major barrier to the adoption of such aids, however, is
this populations familiarity with tablets, since just five of
the participants own or use a tablet on a regular basis. On
the other hand, all had access to a smartphone with P3.3
stating that these devices are more accessible, in terms of
availability, than tablets.
Task two – Image Boards
Previous literature has shown the importance effective
imagery has on the use of AAC devices by people with ID
e.g. [13–15, 18]. Nevertheless, there has been little
exploration into the factors that ensure medical images are
identifiable to this population. Consequently, the
participants were required to evaluate three image sets –
real-life photographs, simplistic black and white drawings
and colored cartoons – and subsequently form two image
boards based on the artefacts’ clarity. The key elements
that influenced their selections will now be discussed.
Facial Expressions
The emotions expressed by an individual had a significant
impact on the clarity of an image. For example, two of the
three workshops originally concluded that the man in Fig
2.1 could not be experiencing pain since his facial
expressions alluded more to happiness. Moreover, the
participants in workshop two were unable to associate the
emotion of sadness with the image shown in Fig. 2.2:
P2.4“I think he was in a dream or something. P2.3: “He
looks like he’s playing with his tablet…I think I’d like tears,
like maybe one of those things with like tears or
something.” P2.3 suggested that the inclusion of tears
would improve this image’s clarity since it may
demonstrate that the person has been crying. Consequently,
these views may imply that it is more appropriate to capture
the extremity of an emotion to ensure it is understood by
the ID population as intended.
Body Position
There were multiple instances in which the position of the
body was considered the most important aspect of an
image. P1.2 was generally able to grasp the meaning of
Fig. 2.1. However, they questioned the location of the
character’s head since he associated the action of looking
up with being in pain. Furthermore, the participants in
workshop two failed to agree upon the clarity of the image
displayed in Fig. 2.3: P2.1: “He’s sort of dozing off there
he can’t keep his eyes open. P2.5: “No, he’s standing up.”
P2.3: You couldn’t sleep standing up. It’s a weird one.”
Despite the facial expression and presence of “z’s” making
the image clear to other participants, P2.3 and 2.4 could not
see past the character standing up. Consequently, they were
more inclined to select images that depicted the character
lying in bed - an action they found more natural for this
scenario. Finally, P2.3 and P2.4 were able to recognize that
the woman in Fig. 2.4 was in distress but felt that the area
of pain was emanating from her cheek due to the position of
her hand. As such, designers must ensure that their images
naturally capture the body language experienced by an
individual suffering from the condition displayed.
Color
Color was shown to both affect the clarity of an image and
differentiate between similar types of pain. For example,
P3.2, who is short sighted, failed to identify that the man in
Fig. 2.5 was sitting in a restroom: P3.2: “I had to really
look closely to see because he’s wearing a white outfit on a
white toilet so I couldn’t even identify the loo. I was
thinking more headache because he’s holding his head.”
This image may therefore have benefited from the use of
contrasting colors to enable people with visual impairments
to recognize its finer details.
P1.2 also raised this point and stated that the black and
white pictures are appropriate for those who are color blind
but may be less aesthetically pleasing for those with normal
vision. Additionally, the participants preferred using color
(as opposed to other methods such as Fig. 2.6) to indicate
the area and intensity of pain, like that shown in Fig. 2.7. In
general, they found warm colors such as red or peach to
indicate more intense pains with cooler colors such as green
and blue representing a numb or tingling feeling.
Lifelike
The participants routinely found the real-life photographs to
be clear, as they reminded them of conditions they had
previously experienced. This was due to the amount of
detail that may be conveyed: P1.2: “It says what it needs to
say but to me the one that we’ve picked over there said it
more…Sometimes actually seeing the physical side of it and
the emotional side of it does work better than the drawing.”
Moreover, the participants felt that even less detail could be
captured by the black and white drawings. For example, in
Fig. 2.8 they found it difficult to establish whether the
woman’s eyes were open. As a result, P1.2 explained that
the black and white image sets may be more appropriate for
users with severe ID but are too simplistic for their own
abilities. This was also true for those drawings that
captured the outline of a body (Fig. 2.9) since no
distinguishable features were included.
Graphic
During each of the workshops, the participants found at
least one image to be too graphic to include in the app. P3.2
suggested that color drawings should be used to capture
these concepts as they are less realistic and may be altered
to obscure the graphic nature of a condition: “I think that is
a little bit too real looking. Whereas the other one [colored
drawing of someone being sick] that’s like a green color,
it’s a little bit of a distraction.”
Personalization
The final concept discussed by the participants in relation to
the images reviewed was personalization. There were
multiple instances in which a participant hesitated to
declare that an image was clear since the traits of the
character displayed were completely different to their own.
This included both gender (Fig. 2.1) and age (Fig. 2.10):
P2.5: “I prefer this one cause that’s just showing you male
and that one’s showing both.” P1.1: “I liked the picture,
but I didn’t pick that one cause it just says that old people
are deaf whereas young people can [also] be deaf.”
In addition, images may have multiple meanings based on
the communication system the user is familiar with: P1.2:
“People with more severe learning disability who are used
to PECS [37] will pick out things like the person with the
lines round him is cold, the person with the arrows is dizzy.
They’ll pick that out because that’s what they’re used to.”
Consequently, this suggests that AAC technologies must
provide the functionality to support users in switching
between multiple image sets based on their own needs.
Task Three – Paper Prototypes
During the development of the paper prototypes, the
participants identified a plethora of design requirements to
be embedded in clinical AAC tablet applications. These are
summarized in Table 2 and generally fit into four themes.
Pre Health Questionnaire
In advance of providing medical information, the
participants requested two features to assist them in
attending the consultation. Ps 2.3 to 2.5 revealed that they
had issues remembering the exact details of an upcoming
appointment and could therefore benefit from a screen that
displays this information P2.5: “A reminder about your
doctor, when you’ve got to go. Cause quite a lot of people,
they do forget about their appointments. Now if they have
something there to remind them about it [that would be
helpful].” The time and location of the appointment, along
with the practicing GP were considered to be the most
important aspects within this process.
During workshop three, the participants also discussed the
difficulties they have in both contacting and accessing
appropriate services: P3.2: “If you put in like your post
code that way it can identify [your] closest GP. Near me
I’ve got 3 different GPs, so it can direct you to the [details
of the] nearest one. You could have sort of like the top 5
[services] dentist, mental health, hospital, A&E, and
GP…A lot of us do need public transport because I can’t
get to <anon> easily. Maybe a little corner bit on that
Figure 2: A subset of images critiqued by the participants during Task 2.
front page to say “here’s the link to these forms of
transport.””
Hence, the app could enable them to identify the most
appropriate local service to treat their current condition,
ranging from dentistry’s to accident and emergencies. In
addition, P3.2 felt that it was paramount to provide public
transport links for these services thus breaking their reliance
on caregivers to gain access to the healthcare system.
Health Questionnaire
All participants agreed that the most effective way to
improve communication with a GP was to supply them with
a list of pre-selected symptoms. This should be achieved via
an accessible questionnaire whose structure follows a
hierarchical route. First, a body part causing the user
distress, or the primary symptom of a common condition,
should be identified. Further options related to that
selection should then be explored: P3.2: “Maybe you had
something that said like different parts of your body. So
head, chest, arms, legs, you have the headings like that and
[then] you go into the subheadings for like symptoms.”
P3.2 suggested that the body parts and primary symptoms
(e.g. weight loss) could be displayed in a color coordinated,
textual list. Nevertheless, this may be inappropriate for
those who are illiterate or require more visual methods of
displaying information. As such, the three workshops
suggested an alternative approach by first presenting an
image of the body to enable the user to tap on the area
causing them pain. The app would then move on to
displaying sub-symptoms in an accessible format (see
“Interaction Modalities”) or if the person was not in pain
display the primary symptoms described previously. A
potential model to achieve this questionnaire structure is
discussed in [38].
Post Health Questionnaire
Once the questionnaire is complete, the participants
requested that the results be displayed in a single screen
using the modalities discussed in the next sub-section. As
such, the stakeholders involved in the consultation may
refer to this information when elaborating on their views.
To facilitate this process, a save and review feature must be
implemented, as well as an option to print the results.
Interaction Modalities
All participants discussed the need to capture the
information displayed via three modalities. The first,
accessible language, entails describing the symptoms and
questions in the simplest terms possible. This includes
avoiding medical jargon where appropriate; however, such
a strategy may not be suitable for patients with visual
problems or insufficient literacy skills. Consequently, the
option to highlight and play back excerpts must be provided
as described by P1.2: “This [audio] button would [first]
say [the question] “are you in pain” and then highlight the
yes [option before] saying “yes” and then highlight no...
Three separate buttons [for each option] would make it
more difficult for somebody with a LD.” In addition to
speech and text, the participants believe that imagery would
help them to understand the more complex symptoms. This
was also true for representing the function of buttons, as
described by P1.2: “See thinking about it the guy with the
speech bubble would probably be better cause that’s saying
that it [audio button] can read it for you.”
Requirement
Personal profiles must be facilitated to enable features such
as saving symptoms in a patient history. (*)
The application should initially determine whether the
patient has a problem with a body part or some other
common condition e.g. diabetes. (*)
Question sets should form a hierarchy with selected
symptoms leading to relevant sub-symptoms. (*)
Patients may select more than one option at a time. Selected
options should be highlighted to distinguish them from
those unselected. (*)
Patient’s should have the option to show where their pain is
by tapping on an image of the body. (*)
A maximum of 4-6 options should be presented at any one
time. (*)
The language embedded within should follow accessibility
guidelines. Medical jargon should be avoided where
possible. (*)
Audio playback of text should be supported within all
pages. (*)
Images should be included to enhance an individual’s
understanding of a medical condition, as well as an
embedded button’s functionality. (*)
An accessible list of the symptoms selected should be
displayed on completion of the questionnaire. (*)
Left (back) and right (forward) arrows should be used to
navigate from a page. (*)
Patients should be able to view the details of upcoming
appointments. (2)
Users should be able to view public transport routes to local
services. (3)
The app may be used to manage a list of medication being
taken by the user. (3)
Selected symptoms should be saved for future use. The
ability to print these results must also be offered. (2)
Color can group logically related items together. (3)
Scrolling should be avoided if possible. (1)
The app should provide access to the user’s patient passport
if available. (3)
Table 2. Features to be included in medical AAC applications
for patients with mild ID. * indicates that all workshops
discussed the requirement with 1, 2 and 3 used otherwise.
Task 4 – Digital Prototype
In the final task, the participants were required to select
symptoms via a digital prototype developed using the
requirements discussed in [14, 15]. Fig. 3 shows the main
page layout embedded within this prototype, which follows
a similar hierarchical procedure described previously. The
feedback received during this process will now be discussed
and is summed up in Table 3.
Tutorial Screen
Despite the symptom selection process being similar to that
identified in the previous task, workshops 2 and 3 were
initially unable to grasp the concept of the questionnaire
hierarchy. Once it was explained that answering yes to a
primary question would lead to its sub-questionnaire being
presented, the participants were able to progress through the
application without support. As such, multiple participants
suggested that it would be necessary to include a tutorial to
enable users to familiarize themselves with the app: P3.2.
“That [the questionnaire hierarchy] I think you would have
to like explain a little bit beforehand because that was a bit
confusing there until you got to that point.”
Customizing Features
Yellow was utilized as the primary background color to
accommodate for users who experience dyslexia [39].
Nevertheless, the participants felt that a range of colors may
be more appropriate for other medical conditions or to
simply meet individual preferences. As such, they requested
the ability to customize the color schemes employed. P3.2
also felt that it may be advantageous to customize the voice
used to play back text to a more local dialect.
Finally, the lead author anticipated that the utilization of a
single image set would lead to accessibility issues for users
with ID. Consequently, a feature was developed to allow
an individual to switch between three styles of images and
this was well received by all participants: P2.3: “I like the
fact that you can change it. Some images aren’t as clear but
then the other ones are a bit clearer, so if you are confused
you can change the image and understand [it] better.”
Usage of Results
All participants felt that the app could improve
communication by providing a building block of symptoms
that may be elaborated on throughout the consultation. This
may also empower patients with limited verbal skills, as
discussed by participant 2.3: “It sort of would be good to
have something like that for, like, people who maybe aren’t
as good at communicating, that can just point to it and have
a limited conversation. Like for me I’m reasonably alright
so therefore I can sort of explain reasonably well if I’m not
well. Whereas not everybody is like that so having this I
think is a good idea cause then you’ve got the basics, so
you just have to polish it up kind of thing.”
One final approach to utilizing the captured results was
discussed by the participants in workshop three. They
suggested that sending the list of symptoms to the practice
in advance of the consultation could assist in overcoming
the various access barriers introduced previously: P3.2: “If
you could scan that result and send it to your GP and they
said, “oh you don’t need to come in cause it’s [not
serious].” So it would also make it beneficial to the actual
service of the thing because you don’t actually want to go
unless you have to.” This process would enable the
practice to arrange an appointment date relative to the
seriousness of the symptoms selected. Consequently, they
may also be able to free up consultation times by
forwarding on patients with less serious illnesses (e.g. a
normal headache) to other services such as a pharmacy.
Requirement
Users have access to a tutorial on how the app works. (*)
Users can switch between different image sets. (*)
Users can customize the color schemes employed. (*)
Users can customize the style of voice played back. (3)
Results should be sent to the practice in advance of the
consultation to ensure appointments are made within a
suitable timeframe. (3)
Table 3. Further features identified by the participants when
completing task four.
DISCUSSION
Many of the barriers identified in task one feature heavily
throughout the literature published in the last two decades.
For example, time constraints and the lack of adjustments
being made to the consultation techniques used by GPs
were discussed in [8, 9, 40]. This suggests that despite
major advancements being made in the past, there is still a
way to go to ensure the equal treatment of patients with ID.
Technology has a major role to play but cannot solve all the
barriers previously discussed without wholesale changes
being made to the social culture and processes contained
within the healthcare system. Trollor et al. [3] demonstrated
this when examining the depth of ID training received by
medical students in Australia. They found that the students
received just 2.55 hours of compulsory training and the
elective courses available varied markedly in both quality
and length. As such, Trollor et al. concluded that there is “a
mismatch between the considerable unmet health needs of
people with intellectual disability and the inconsistent
teaching within medical schools” [3]. This may be partly
responsible for the low levels of confidence reported by
medical professionals [4, 41] when treating people with ID.
Fig 3. Primary Screen included in the prototype.
One aspect of the consultation process that may
immediately benefit from the use of technology is
communication – particularly when our findings show that
AAC devices are vastly underused in this context. We have
provided guidance on how to develop these technologies by
extracting design requirements from end users. Some of the
lessons learned during this process, may also assist in
increasing the accessibility of healthcare services for other
populations who experience communication impairments.
Overcoming Access Barriers
The bulk of the literature investigating the use of AAC in
healthcare [12–15, 18, 20] has overlooked the barriers
people with ID face when accessing such services e.g. [5, 6,
9]. Nevertheless, the end users involved in our study felt
that the proposed app could alleviate access barriers in two
main ways. First, it can support people with ID in
identifying the most appropriate service to meet their
medical needs, along with public transport routes to attend
this service. Second, the participants believed that the app
could assist them in being treated in a timely manner. This
may be achieved by sending a list of symptoms to a practice
in advance of the consultation, to enable an appointment to
be made in a time period relative to the seriousness of the
symptoms.
Providing the Patient’s Accessibility & Medical Needs
Technology may support medical professionals in
administering person-centered care by providing them with
information regarding the needs and skills of the patient
[12, 13, 18]. P3.2 agreed with this and requested that an
individual’s patient passport be integrated with the app
where available. Nonetheless, the participants also
suggested that allowing the GP to have access to a list of
pre-selected symptoms could have significant benefits to
the consultation, therefore agreeing with the experts
involved in [14–16]. This should be facilitated by an
accessible questionnaire that first extracts the primary
symptom experienced by the user, before exploring further
symptoms related to that condition. Such a structure enables
the questionnaire to incorporate a wide range of conditions,
whilst remaining succinct enough to accommodate for short
attention spans [38]. In addition, the questions embedded
within should be based on the health demographics of the
ID population, meaning the app has the potential to identify
conditions commonly overlooked by GPs. The results will
be used as a referent throughout the consultation and enable
GPs to concentrate on areas of interest for longer, thus
alleviating any time constraints present.
Customization
A one size fits all approach is simply inappropriate to cater
to the wide range of abilities within the ID population.
Potential areas for customization identified by the
participants with ID therefore included the interaction
modalities, background color, and artificial voice
employed, which matched the findings of the experts in [14,
15]. Additionally, the end users requested the ability to
switch between multiple styles of image sets used to display
potential medical conditions, like that in [13].
Identifiable Medical Imagery
Finally, a variety of factors have been identified that affect
the clarity of medical images - a resource shown to be
crucial to the utilization of AAC technologies [14, 15, 23].
Some of these factors matched the findings made by Medhi
et al. [42] when exploring text free interfaces. Both sets of
participants gravitated towards the more real looking
photographs. In addition, color was used to convey and
distinguish between complex concepts (e.g. type of pain).
Other factors that increased the clarity of medical images,
included: displaying the extremity of emotions; capturing
the natural body language conveyed by an individual; and
avoiding overly graphic images
LIMITATIONS & FUTURE WORK
The primary limitation of this study involves the
demographics of the participants with mild ID. 9 of the 10
individuals came from, and attended consultations in, major
cities that operate within a single healthcare system.
Consequently, there is scope to explore the needs of rural
patients and those from other countries, since their
requirements may be significantly different. Further
opportunities for future work include: building on the
requirements extracted from the GPs in [14, 15] to further
explore their communication and technological needs;
designing an image set to be included in the app; and
evaluating a concrete probe within the primary care context.
CONCLUSION
AAC technologies have the potential to assist people with
mild ID throughout all aspects of life, yet our findings show
their use remains limited within the clinical context. Just
one of the ten participants regularly utilized an aid (patient
passport) during consultations, despite the call for the
embedment of high-tech AAC devices being made as far
back as 1997 [43]. One reason for this may be the lack of
guidelines to assist developers in creating such
technologies. The authors could only identify those
disseminated by Gibson et al. [14–16] yet their studies
suffered from a lack of end-user involvement.
Consequently, we extracted design requirements for a
clinical AAC application from ten people with mild ID. The
participants believe that the aid can assist in mitigating
barriers across the entire consultation process, beginning
with reserving and accessing appointments. The primary
method of promoting communication aligned with the
views of the experts in [14–16], by supplying GPs with
symptoms selected from an accessible questionnaire. This
questionnaire should adapt to both the user’s accessibility
and medical needs and utilize evidence on the health trends
experienced by people with ID. As such, commonly
overlooked conditions may also be brought to the attention
of the GP and potential time constraints may be alleviated.
REFERENCES
1. Shanafelt, T.D., Hasan, O., Dyrbye, L.N., Sinsky, C.,
Satele, D., Sloan, J., West, C.P.: Changes in Burnout
and Satisfaction With Work-Life Balance in
Physicians and the General US Working Population
Between 2011 and 2014. Mayo Clin. Proc. 90, 1600–
1613 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.08.023
2. Hall, L.H., Johnson, J., Watt, I., O’Connor, D.B.:
Association of GP wellbeing and burnout with patient
safety in UK primary care: a cross-sectional survey.
Br J Gen Pract. 69, e507–e514 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp19X702713
3. Trollor, J.N., Ruffell, B., Tracy, J., Torr, J.J.,
Durvasula, S., Iacono, T., Eagleson, C., Lennox, N.:
Intellectual disability health content within medical
curriculum: an audit of what our future doctors are
taught. BMC Med Educ. 16, (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-016-0625-1
4. Hemsley, B., Balandin, S.: A Metasynthesis of
Patient-Provider Communication in Hospital for
Patients with Severe Communication Disabilities:
Informing New Translational Research. Augment
Altern Commun. 30, 329–343 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.3109/07434618.2014.955614
5. Heslop, P., Blair, P., Fleming, P., Hoghton, M.,
Marriott, A., Russ, L.: Confidential Inquiry into
premature deaths of people with learning disabilities,
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-
library/sites/cipold/migrated/documents/fullfinalrepor
t.pdf
6. Krahn, G.L., Hammond, L., Turner, A.: A cascade of
disparities: health and health care access for people
with intellectual disabilities. Ment Retard Dev
Disabil Res Rev. 12, 70–82 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1002/mrdd.20098
7. Simpson, N.J.: Bridging primary and secondary care
for people with learning disabilities. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment. 1, 207–213 (1995).
https://doi.org/10.1192/apt.1.7.207
8. Phillips, A., Morrison, J., Davis, R.W.: General
practitioners’ educational needs in intellectual
disability health. J Intellect Disabil Res. 48, 142–149
(2004)
9. Ali, A., Scior, K., Ratti, V., Strydom, A., King, M.,
Hassiotis, A.: Discrimination and Other Barriers to
Accessing Health Care: Perspectives of Patients with
Mild and Moderate Intellectual Disability and Their
Carers. PLOS ONE. 8, e70855 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0070855
10. Dodd, K., Brunker, J.: ‘Feeling Poorly’: Report of a
Pilot Study Aimed to Increase the Ability of People
with Learning Disabilities to Understand and
Communicate About Physical Illness. British Journal
of Learning Disabilities. 27, 10–15 (1999).
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3156.1999.tb00076.x
11. Northway, R., Rees, S., Davies, M., Williams, S.:
Hospital passports, patient safety and person-centred
care: A review of documents currently used for
people with intellectual disabilities in the UK. J Clin
Nurs. 26, 5160–5168 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.14065
12. Prior, S.: HCI Methods for Including Adults with
Disabilities in the Design of CHAMPION. In: CHI
’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. pp. 2891–2894. ACM, New
York, NY, USA (2010)
13. Prior, S., Waller, A., Kroll, T.: The CHAMPION
Software Project. In: The Proceedings of the 13th
International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
Computers and Accessibility. pp. 287–288. ACM,
New York, NY, USA (2011)
14. Gibson, R.C., Bouamrane, M.-M., Dunlop, M.:
Mobile support for adults with mild learning
disabilities during clinical consultations. In:
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices
and Services - MobileHCI ’18. pp. 1–8. ACM Press,
Barcelona, Spain (2018)
15. Gibson, R.C., Bouamrane, M.-M., Dunlop, M.:
Design Requirements for a Digital Aid to Support
Adults With Mild Learning Disabilities During
Clinical Consultations: Qualitative Study With
Experts. JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive
Technologies. 6, e10449 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.2196/10449
16. Gibson, R.C., Bouamrane, M.-M., Dunlop, M.:
Experts Views on the Use of Mobile Devices to
Support Patients with Mild Learning Disabilities
During Clinical Consultations. Stud Health Technol
Inform. 264, 1199–1203 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.3233/SHTI190416
17. Mirenda, P.: Toward Functional Augmentative and
Alternative Communication for Students With
Autism: Manual Signs, Graphic Symbols, and Voice
Output Communication Aids. Lang Speech Hear Serv
Sch. 34, 203–216 (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2003/017)
18. Menzies, R., Herron, D., Scott, L., Freeman, R.,
Waller, A.: Involving Clinical Staff in the Design of a
Support Tool Improve Dental Communication for
Patients with Intellectual Disabilities. In: Proceedings
of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS
Conference on Computers and Accessibility. pp.
55:1–55:2. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2013)
19. WHO: Definition: intellectual disability,
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-
topics/noncommunicable-diseases/mental-
health/news/news/2010/15/childrens-right-to-family-
life/definition-intellectual-disability
20. Brodrick, D., Lewis, D., Worth, A., Marland, A.:
One-page patient passport for people with learning
disabilities. Nurs Stand. 25, 35–40 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.7748/ns2011.07.25.47.35.c8644
21. Talking Mats Limited: Talking Mats - Improving
communication, improving lives,
https://www.talkingmats.com/
22. Bell, D.M., Cameron, L.: From Dare I say … ? to I
dare say: a case example illustrating the extension of
the use of Talking Mats to people with learning
disabilities who are able to speak well but unwilling
to do so. British Journal of Learning Disabilities. 36,
122–127 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
3156.2007.00475.x
23. Boström, P., Eriksson, E.: Design for Self-reporting
Psychological Health in Children with Intellectual
Disabilities. In: Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Interaction Design and Children. pp.
279–282. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2015)
24. Boström, P., Johnels, J.Å., Thorson, M., Broberg, M.:
Subjective Mental Health, Peer Relations, Family,
and School Environment in Adolescents with
Intellectual Developmental Disorder: A First Report
of a New Questionnaire Administered on Tablet PCs.
Journal of Mental Health Research in Intellectual
Disabilities. 9, 207–231 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1080/19315864.2016.1186254
25. Boström, P., Broberg, M.: Protection and restriction:
A mixed‐methods study of self‐reported well‐being
among youth with intellectual disabilities. JARID.
31, 164–176 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1111/jar.12364
26. Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S.,
Nazareth, I., Petticrew, M.: Developing and
evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical
Research Council guidance. BMJ. 337, (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a1655
27. Bradshaw, J.: The use of augmentative and
alternative communication apps for the iPad, iPod
and iPhone: an overview of recent developments.
Tizard Learning Disability Review. (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1108/13595471311295996
28. Baxter, S., Enderby, P., Evans, P., Judge, S.: Barriers
and facilitators to the use of high-technology
augmentative and alternative communication devices:
a systematic review and qualitative synthesis. Int J
Lang Commun Disord. 47, 115–129 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-6984.2011.00090.x
29. Alper, S., Raharinirina, S.: Assistive Technology for
Individuals with Disabilities: A Review and
Synthesis of the Literature. J Spec Educ Technol. 21,
47–64 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1177/016264340602100204
30. Blackstone, S.W., Williams, M.B., Joyce, M.: Future
AAC technology needs: consumer perspectives.
Assist Technol. 14, 3–16 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2002.10132051
31. Horner-Johnson, W., Bailey, D.: Assessing
Understanding and Obtaining Consent from Adults
with Intellectual Disabilities for a Health Promotion
Study. J Policy Pract Intellect Disabil. 10, (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1111/jppi.12048
32. Doyle, J.: Using Focus Groups as a Research Method
in Intellectual Disability Research: A Practical Guide,
http://www.fedvol.ie/_fileupload/Research/focus%20
groups%20a%20practical%20guide.pdf, (2009)
33. Zisook, M., Patel, R.: Exploring the Communication
Needs of People with Disabilities Through
Participatory Design. In: CHI’14. p. 4. Association
for Computing Machinery (2014)
34. Sitbon, L., Farhin, S.: Co-designing interactive
applications with adults with intellectual disability.
In: Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on
Computer-Human Interaction. pp. 487–491. ACM,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia (2017)
35. Gale, N.K., Heath, G., Cameron, E., Rashid, S.,
Redwood, S.: Using the framework method for the
analysis of qualitative data in multi-disciplinary
health research. BMC Medical Research
Methodology. 13, 117 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-13-117
36. GAIN: Guidelines on Caring For People with a
Learning Disability in General Hospital Settings,
https://rqia.org.uk/RQIA/files/81/81662c46-b7bb-
43a5-9496-a7f2d919c2a3.pdf
37. Charlop-Christy, M.H., Carpenter, M., Le, L.,
LeBlanc, L.A., Kellet, K.: Using the picture exchange
communication system (PECS) with children with
autism: assessment of PECS acquisition, speech,
social-communicative behavior, and problem
behavior. J Appl Behav Anal. 35, 213–231 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1901/jaba.2002.35-213
38. Gibson, R.C., Bouamrane, M.-M., Dunlop, M.D.:
Ontology-Driven, Adaptive, Medical Questionnaires
for Patients with Mild Learning Disabilities. In:
Bramer, M. and Petridis, M. (eds.) Artificial
Intelligence XXXVI. pp. 107–121. Springer
International Publishing, Cham (2019)
39. Stein, J.: What is Developmental Dyslexia? Brain
Sciences. 8, 26 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci8020026
40. Lennox, N.G., Diggens, J.N., Ugoni, A.M.: The
general practice care of people with intellectual
disability: barriers and solutions. J Intellect Disabil
Res. 41 ( Pt 5), 380–390 (1997)
41. Pelleboer‐Gunnink, H.A., Oorsouw, W.M.W.J.V.,
Weeghel, J.V., Embregts, P.J.C.M.: Mainstream
health professionals’ stigmatising attitudes towards
people with intellectual disabilities: a systematic
review. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research.
61, 411–434 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1111/jir.12353
42. Medhi, I., Sagar, A., Toyama, K.: Text-Free User
Interfaces for Illiterate and Semiliterate Users.
Information Technologies and International
Development. 4, 14 (2007)
43. Jones, R.G., Kerr, M.P.: A randomized control trial
of an opportunistic health screening tool in primary
care for people with intellectual disability. J Intellect
Disabil Res. 41 ( Pt 5), 409–415 (1997)
