Studying the Effects of Cognitive Biases in Evaluation of
Conversational Agents
Sashank Santhanam, Alireza Karduni and Samira Shaikh
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Charlotte, USA
{ssantha1,akarduni,samirashaikh}@uncc.edu
ABSTRACT
Humans quite frequently interact with conversational agents.
The rapid advancement in generative language modeling
through neural networks has helped advance the creation of in-
telligent conversational agents. Researchers typically evaluate
the output of their models through crowdsourced judgments,
but there are no established best practices for conducting such
studies. Moreover, it is unclear if cognitive biases in decision-
making are affecting crowdsourced workers’ judgments when
they undertake these tasks. To investigate, we conducted a
between-subjects study with 77 crowdsourced workers to un-
derstand the role of cognitive biases, specifically anchoring
bias, when humans are asked to evaluate the output of conver-
sational agents. Our results provide insight into how best to
evaluate conversational agents. We find increased consistency
in ratings across two experimental conditions may be a result
of anchoring bias. We also determine that external factors
such as time and prior experience in similar tasks have effects
on inter-rater consistency.
Author Keywords
Conversational agents; Human evaluation; Anchoring bias;
Experiment design
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → HCI design and evalua-
tion methods; User studies; •Computing methodologies →
Discourse, dialogue and pragmatics;
INTRODUCTION
Conversational agents, also commonly known as chatbots,
are typically designed with the intention of generating mean-
ingful, informative and coherent responses that keep humans
engaged in conversation. Conversational agents have become
extremely popular and have been heralded as one of the recent
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376318
breakthrough technologies.1 The development of conversa-
tional agents has evolved from simple rule-based approaches
such as Eliza [61] and PARRY [16] to more sophisticated
templates-based [43, 55] and data-driven approaches [35, 6].
Extant approaches towards building conversational agents are
end-to-end systems that employ seq2seq architectures [58, 52],
language modeling [11, 44] or transformer architectures [56].
Even with the rapid advancement in the development of con-
versational agents through these neural approaches, there are
no established set of best practices towards evaluating their
performance. Evaluation procedures vary from one research
article to the next, leading to a fragmented view of how the
field is advancing. Overall, the output generated from these
models is evaluated using automated metrics and/or (crowd-
sourced) human judgments. With respect to automated metrics,
measures including BLEU [47], METEOR [5], ROUGE [39]
and word-embedding based metrics [41], which can be cal-
culated based on word overlap have been used. However,
prior research has shown that these metrics show little to no
correlation with human ratings [45, 42, 41]. Due to these
limitations of automated metrics, evaluation of chatbots is in-
creasingly conducted by obtaining qualitative judgments from
crowd-sourced workers [44, 63]. This puts a major imperative
on how the experiments to collect crowd-sourced judgments
are designed. However, research advancing best practices for
experiment design for evaluating chatbots performance and
obtaining more reliable and consistent ratings from crowd-
sourced workers is very limited. Our work seeks to fill this
research gap.
Consider the simple choice of the type of question used to
elicit human judgments. Most current experiments for evalu-
ating conversational agent output use Likert scales; a typical
question would be to ask the humans to rate the Readability
of chatbot output on a scale of 1–5. However, research by
Belz and Kow [10] has shown that using Likert scales may
affect rating consistency, for example, some individuals may
tend to avoid the extremes of the scale while others may not.
Novikova et al. [46] have shown that continuous scales help
improve the consistency and reliability of human ratings across
several language evaluation tasks as opposed to Likert scales.
In their experiments, Novikova et al. [46] found that consis-
tency of crowd-sourced workers improved when workers were
asked to rate the conversational agent output by comparing
1https://www.technologyreview.com/lists/technologies/2016/
arXiv:2002.07927v2
[cs.CL]
26
Feb
2020
it against a given (gold) standard. A sample question in their
study would ask human raters to input a number to rate the
Readability of an algorithm output by comparing it against
the provided gold standard response (with a standard response
value of 100). But what if this increased consistency is a result
of the very presence of the predetermined gold standard, possi-
bly because humans evaluators are anchored on that standard
value of 100?
Anchoring bias, which is the tendency of people to focus on the
first piece of information presented; also defined as “inability
of the people to make sufficient adjustments starting from the
initial value (anchor) to yield the final answer” [28]. Decades
of research has resulted in a robust finding that humans are
prone to cognitive biases when engaged in decision-making
[54, 28, 22, 15, 62, 17], which are heuristics that help humans
reach decisions quickly [28]. To the best of our knowledge,
the impact of anchoring bias when humans evaluate conver-
sational agent output has not heretofore been studied, even
as human evaluation has become an integral piece of most
current research evaluating chatbots.
To investigate the effects of cognitive biases, specifically an-
choring bias, on decision-making around evaluating chatbot
output, we designed a 2X2 experiment with 77 crowdsourced
workers. We studied how anchors (both numerical and textual)
and the presentation order of rating tasks affect consistency of
human judgments. We elicited ratings from workers on two
metrics: Readability and Coherence of model output. Our key
findings are listed below.
• We find systematic effects of anchoring in the magnitude
of participants’ ratings: participants who are presented with
an anchor will provide a rating that is closer to the anchor
value than those who are not presented with an anchor.
• We find systematic effects of anchoring in the consistency
of participants’ ratings: participants who are presented with
an anchor will be (generally) more consistent in their ratings
than those who are not presented with an anchor.
• We find that interpretation of metrics affects consistency:
participants were more consistent with their ratings on Read-
ability than in their ratings on Coherence, potentially be-
cause the interpretation of Coherence is more subjective
than Readability.
Our findings demonstrate the impact anchoring bias might
have in designing evaluation experiments. Along with explor-
ing the impact of anchoring, we also provide insights into how
the prior experience of being involved in similar research stud-
ies as well as time taken to complete the task as factors that
can affect rating consistency. Our findings have the potential
to advance the field of human-agent interaction by extending
the reproducibility of conversational agent evaluation experi-
ments. The findings of this paper are applicable to other areas
of natural language processing, including text summarization
and story generation, that also rely on human evaluation to
study the quality of the algorithms. More broadly, the design
of experiments in this paper can be adapted to investigate the
effects of cognitive biases in a range of human-computer inter-
action tasks, building upon prior work in Explainable AI [60]
and bias mitigation [51].
RELATED WORK
Our work relates to three primary areas of research; we present
related work in each area in this subsection.
Cognitive Biases in Decision Making
Evaluating algorithm output is an inherently subjective task.
Cognitive biases, simple heuristics that are effective but may
lead to suboptimal decision-making, especially when uncer-
tainty is involved [54], are a critical concern but surprisingly
understudied when evaluating conversational agent output.
Cognitive biases were first introduced by Tversky and Kahne-
man, and have been studied extensively in the field of psychol-
ogy [30, 54, 21]. One form of cognitive bias is anchoring bias,
which is when humans rely on a single piece of information
(“anchor”) to make a decision [29]. Tversky and Kahneman
[54] found evidence that when individuals are asked to provide
an estimate, their estimates were pretty close to the reference
value or anchor. Anchoring can thus affect decision-making in
visual analytics [15, 62], valuations [1], even general knowl-
edge [25, 22]. For Natural Language Processing tasks how-
ever, there has been little research studying the impact of
anchoring bias. One prior study by Berzak et al. [12] evalu-
ated the impact of anchoring bias in the creation of syntactic
parsers. When it comes to evaluating the output of conversa-
tional agents, there has been no prior work on understanding
the impact of cognitive biases. Our work is the first step in
that direction.
Evaluation of Dialogue Systems
There are two main domains in which conversational agents
are deployed: open-domain [20, 50, 2] and goal-oriented [40]
conversational settings. Goal-oriented systems are designed
to achieve a specific goal, such as restaurant booking [13] or
movie ticket booking [38]. Open-domain systems, also known
commonly as chit-chat systems, engage with a conversation
partner towards no predetermined goal [63]. Typically, natural
language generation in conversational agents is achieved by
training seq2seq architectures [58, 52]. Prior research has
shown that agents built using seq2seq frameworks suffer from
generating dull and generic responses [58, 36]. Evaluating
the quality of responses generated by these models in open-
domain situations is thus an important area of research because
it affects user satisfaction and engagement [59, 57].
To evaluate output automatically, researchers have adopted
metrics such as BLEU [47], METEOR [5] and ROUGE [39]
from machine translation and text summarization [41] tasks.
BLEU, METEOR and ROUGE can be computed based on
word overlap between the proposed and ground truth re-
sponses; however, they do not adequately account for the
diversity of responses that are possible for a given input utter-
ance. Experiments show that these automated metrics along
with word embedding based metrics [41] show little to no cor-
relation with human ratings [41, 42]. With the lack of proper
automated metrics for evaluation, obtaining human ratings is a
primary evaluation method for evaluating chatbots. Even with
human evaluation, a variety of metrics have been proposed,
including ease of answering [37], coherence [37], informa-
tion flow [37] , naturalness [2], fluency [63] and engagement
[57]. Our current study builds upon this prior research and
seeks to investigate the use of appropriate metrics in evaluat-
ing chatbots. As an experiment design choice, we also asked
crowdsourced workers which metrics they would themselves
consider most important while undertaking these tasks.
Experiment Design in Language Evaluation
Our focus in this paper is on experiment design. Our moti-
vation to do so is based on prior research that demonstrated
the effectiveness of different questions types (e.g. continuous
scales, magnitude estimation, etc.) to obtain human ratings
instead of using discrete scales (e.g. Likert scales) [46, 10, 9,
32]. Likert Scales are widely used to obtain human ratings
for conversational agent output [18, 63, 14]. However, Likert
scales suffer from a number of limitations such as inconsisten-
cies in ratings by different annotators, scale region bias and
fixed granularity [32, 48, 8]. Recent work done by Novikova
et al. [46] addresses the issue of inconsistency in ratings, al-
though in goal-oriented systems. Their work demonstrates
the effectiveness of using continuous scales towards increased
consistency for language evaluation tasks. However, the extent
to which anchoring bias may affect consistency has not been
previously studied. Prior research from Novikova et al. [46]
also demonstrates an increase in consistency when the rating
tasks are split so that each metric is rated individually (rating
Readability followed by rating Coherence). Taking inspiration
from this, our experiment design has explicit conditions to
investigate the effects of splitting the rating tasks.
To summarize this Related Work section, evaluation of dia-
logue system output relies increasingly on human evaluation,
yet not a lot of research focuses on experiment design for this
task. Also, we find very little work towards understanding
the impact of cognitive biases that might affect ratings ob-
tained from crowd-sourced workers. Our present study seeks
to fill this research gap and propose better experiment design
procedures for use by fellow researchers in this area.
CORPUS AND MODELS
To obtain ratings on conversational agent output, we trained
three models from scratch to generate responses. Code for
these models was made available by Dziri et al. [20] (https:
//github.com/nouhadziri/THRED). We first describe the corpus
we used to train the models.
Corpus
We used the Reddit Conversational Corpus made available
by Dziri et al. [20]. This corpus consists of conversations
obtained from 95 different subreddits, curated out of 1.1M
subreddits. The date range is a 20-month period from Novem-
ber, 2016 until August, 2018. Table 1 shows overall descriptive
statistics of the corpus, where the average length of utterances
is consistent across the Training, Validation and Test sets.
Train Valid. Test
Dialogues 9.2M 500K 400K
Avg. Length of Utterances 13.98 13.98 13.99
Table 1. Descriptive statistics of the corpus used in our experiments.
Models
All three models used in our experiments are based on seq2seq
approaches that contain an encoder and decoder component.
Seq2seq approaches are commonly used in language genera-
tion tasks, such as machine translation and dialogue genera-
tion. For dialogue generation, the encoder receives the input
sequence X = x1,x2,....,xn as input. Each input sequence
is passed through an LSTM [26] on the encoder side which
produces a hidden state representation (Eq 1.)
henc
t = f(henc
t−1,xt). (1)
where henc
t−1 represents the previous hidden state and f repre-
sents a non-linear activation function. The decoder uses the
last hidden state of the encoder as the initial state and out-
put tokens are conditioned on the input (Eq 2.) where yt−1
represents the ground truth input into the decoder.
sdec
t = f(sdec
t−1,yt−1) (2)
1. Seq2Seq: Our first model is a traditional seq2seq model
with attention mechanism. We use the attention mecha-
nism proposed by Bahdanau et al. [4]. Attention assists
the decoder to attend to different parts of the input while
generating the response. The decoder produces a context
vector ct at each time step by attending to the encoder hid-
den state henc
t along with the last hidden of the decoder st−1
(represented through Eq 3.) where α represents the relative
importance on the input side. The output from the model yt
is produced through a softmax function (Eq 4.).
ci =
n
∑
i=1
αihenc
i
αi =
exp(ei)
∑n
j=1 exp(ej)
ei = f(st−1,hi)
(3)
yt = softmax(yt−1,st,ct) (4)
2. HRED: Our second model uses Hierarchical Encoder-
Decoder [50] architecture. This model is an advancement
over traditional seq2seq models. HRED overcomes the bot-
tlenecks of traditional seq2seq models by capturing longer
context from dialogue histories. HRED model introduces a
two-level hierarchy to capture long term context. The first
layer is called the utterance layer that captures the meaning
of each sentence, similar to traditional seq2seq models. It
further encodes the hidden states of the utterance layer to
the inter-utterance layers that capture the context and input
information [53].
3. THRED: Our last model is the Topic Augmented Hierar-
chical Encoder-Decoder [20]. This model uses topic words
along with a hierarchical encoder-decoder to produce a re-
sponse. The topic words were obtained using a pre-trained
LDA model [27]. This model also makes uses of attention
mechanism on the context along with the topic words from
the input sequence.
Sample Output from Models: In Figure 1 (top-left), we
show a sample conversation from the Reddit Corpus. It con-
sists of two sentences, spoken by Person A and B. The corpus
also provides the target (or gold-Standard) response against
which the model can be trained, and also against which per-
formance can be evaluated. This is shown in the Standard
Response in Figure 1 screenshot. In the bottom of the screen-
shot, the output from the three generative models described in
this section is shown (seq2seq, HRED and THRED output in
Response 1, 2 and 3 respectively).
EXPERIMENT DESIGN
Having obtained the outputs from our three models, we built
an interface to allow participants to evaluate the generated
responses. We initially focus on two metrics: Readability and
Coherence. Readability and Coherence are frequently used
in obtaining evaluation ratings from crowd-sourced workers
[45, 24, 63, 2]. Readability measures the linguistic quality
of text and helps quantify the difficulty of understanding the
text by the reader [23, 45]. Coherence measures the ability
to produce responses consistent with the topic or context of
conversation [57]. Based on prior findings of the limitations
of Likert scales [10],
we instead use magnitude estimation (ME) questions to ob-
tain ratings from crowdsourced workers. Magnitude Estima-
tion allows participants to rate the responses over a free scale
without being constrained. Recently, Novikova et al. [46]
demonstrated that use of magnitude estimation helps improve
consistency amongst crowd-sourced workers when evaluating
responses from goal-oriented systems. We build upon this
prior work but specifically focus on investigating the impact
of cognitive biases to design our experiments.
Accordingly, we design four experiment conditions, namely
Anchor: With or Without Anchor and Presentation Order:
Both Questions or Single Question (on a single screen). Ta-
ble 2 shows the four different experiment conditions in our
experiment design, while Figure 1 shows two sample screen-
shots from the study interface.
No Anchor Anchor
Both Questions (Setup 1) 18 22
Single Question (Setup 2) 18 19
Table 2. 2X2 experiment design with four experiment conditions and
number of participants across each condition
As shown in Figure 1, participants across all experiment condi-
tions are shown the Conversation Context (A). Participants in
the Anchor conditions are shown the Standard Response and
the Readability and Coherence value of the Standard Response
(set to 100 in this study, following prior work done by [46]);
together these form the Numerical and Textual Anchor (B)
(Figure 1-left). Participants in the No Anchor condition are
shown neither the Standard Response nor the Readability and
Coherence value of the standard response (B’) (Figure 1-right).
Participants in the Both Questions (Setup 1) condition are
asked to input their ratings of Readability and Coherence on
a single screen (C) (as shown in Figure 1-left). Participants
in the Single Question condition (Setup 2) are asked to input
their ratings on a single metric on single screen (as shown Fig-
ure 1-right (C’) for Readability), and then input their ratings
on the Coherence metric on the next screen when they click
the next button (not shown).
Figure 2 provides the flow of steps taken by workers in the ex-
periment, beginning with the informed consent procedure and
pre-questionnaire, followed by the task of evaluating 50 sets
of outputs on two metrics of Readability and Coherence and
ending with the post-questionnaire. In the pre-questionnaire,
we asked two questions about the prior experience of workers:
(Q1) Have you taken part in previous studies that involve evalu-
ating conversational responses? and (Q2) Have you taken part
in previous studies that involve talking to a chatbot? Our mo-
tivation behind asking these questions is to understand if prior
experience participating in similar studies affects inter-rater
consistency. In the post-questionnaire, we obtain participant
demographics including their age, gender, race, and education.
We also ask them if they find it preferable to provide ratings as
magnitude estimation question or on Likert scales. In addition,
we obtain their free-form responses on which metrics they
would consider important for evaluating conversational agent
output. These post-questionnaire questions are designed to
obtain qualitative data to better inform our future studies.
Research Questions
Following the review of prior work in this area and our de-
cisions on the experiment design, we developed three main
research questions for our study.
• RQ1: Which factors affect the magnitude of ratings pro-
vided by the participants? Rationale: The presence of an
anchor may orient participants towards that number (100)
and also the reference text, thus we expect that participants
in the anchoring conditions will have higher ratings (closer
to 100) than do participants in the no anchor conditions. In
addition, we investigate if the presentation order of ques-
tions (Setup 1 vs. Setup 2) has an effect on how high
participants’ ratings are on the task. We also investigate
whether the time to complete the task has any effect on
the magnitude of ratings. We use the responses on the pre-
questionnaire about the prior experience to analyze whether
having taken part in similar studies or conversing with a
chatbot has any effect on the magnitude of ratings.
• RQ2: Which factors affect the consistency in ratings pro-
vided by participants? Rationale: Similar to RQ1, we ex-
pect that the presence of an anchor may orient participants
towards that number (100) and also the reference text, thus
we expect that participants in the anchoring conditions will
have higher consistency in their ratings than do participants
in the no anchor conditions. In addition, we investigate if
the presentation order of questions (Setup 1 vs. Setup 2)
has an effect on the consistency of ratings on the task. We
also investigate whether the time to complete the task and
prior experience affect inter-rater consistency.
• RQ3: Are participants more consistent in their ratings of
readability than coherence? Rationale: Across both setups,
we except higher consistency in readability ratings than co-
herence. We also expect the impact of anchoring to be more
pronounced for readability over coherence. We contend
coherence is more subjective to evaluate than is readability,
since humans have judge whether the response is related to
Figure 1. Sample screen showing variations in the experiment conditions. (A) represents the conversational context that is shown across all conditions.
(B) is the numerical and textual anchor presented to participants in anchoring conditions. (B’) shows the screenshot of conditions where no anchor
is presented. (C) is used in Setup 1 where both questions of readability and coherence ratings are shown together. (C’) is used in Setup 2 where the
readability and coherence are treated as individual tasks and only one is shown at a time to the participant.
Figure 2. The experiment flow for each crowd-sourced worker taking
part in this study.
the context of the conversation [19, 45]. Readability on the
other hand has been evaluated across other fields through
automated metrics and is more well-defined [31].
RESULTS
We present the results of our analysis in this section. We begin
by describing the pool of participants we recruited and the
quality checks we put in place to ensure high-quality crowd-
sourced data.
Descriptive Statistics
Our study was approved under our institution’s Institutional
Review Board (IRB) policies (IRB #18-0357). Table 2 pro-
vides the number of participants across the four experiment
conditions. We recruited crowdsourced workers through Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk.2 The participants were assigned to
experiment condition randomly. We allowed each partici-
pant a maximum of 4 hours to complete the study. In or-
der to ensure high-quality data, we had stringent qualifying
2https://www.mturk.com/
criteria: (1) Workers should have a Masters qualification;3
(2) HIT Approval Rate to be > 80; and (3) Number of ap-
proved HITs > 500. Our study interface was hosted on a
secure server at our institution and participant responses were
saved in a MongoDB database. In our analyses, we use the
aggregated value of the responses provided by each partici-
pant for the entire task. The entire anonymized data, anal-
yses and code used in this study are available at this link:
https://github.com/sashank06/ConvEvaluation_CHI2020.
A total of 77 crowdsourced workers participated in our study.
The gender distribution was 67.5% male (52), 31.17% female
(24) and 1.33% other (1). The age of workers was between
20 and 60 years (mean=34.85 years). A majority of the par-
ticipants had an undergraduate degree (n = 37), while others
indicated having a Masters degree (n = 23), Doctorate (n = 6)
and High School diploma (n = 11). In terms of race/ethnicity,
n = 37 were Indian, along with White (n = 27), Black (n = 2),
East Asian (n = 7), Hispanic (n = 3) and Native American
(n = 1) making up rest of the demographics.
In the pre-questionnaire, we also asked participants to indicate:
(Q1) whether the participant has taken part in prior research
studies evaluating conversational responses; and (Q2) interact-
ing with a chatbot. Table 3 provides the number of participants’
response across both setups to the pre-questionnaire questions.
Analysis and Results for RQ1
Effects of anchor and type of setup on magnitude of ratings
We find significant differences between the magnitude of re-
sponses provided by participants across the both setups with
p < 0.001. Figure 3 provides the mean and bootstrapped
confidence interval (95%) of the responses across the exper-
iment conditions. In Setup 1, we find that participants with
no anchor produce ratings (M = 58.92) that are significantly
lower than ratings provided by participants in anchor condi-
tion (M = 72.94). We find a similar pattern across Setup 2
3https://www.mturk.com/worker/help
Question 1 Question 2
Yes No Yes No
Setup 1 No Anchor 5 13 5 13
Anchor 4 18 5 17
Setup 2
No Anchor 7 11 8 10
Anchor 6 13 7 12
Table 3. Number of participants in each category: we refer to prior
experience on evaluating conversational output as Question 1 and prior
experience of engaging with chatbots as Question 2.
with no anchor, resulting in a mean rating of 61.25, while rat-
ings in anchor condition responses have a mean of 69.02. We
analyze the ratings on Readability and Coherence separately
(Figure 4): the presence of numerical and textual anchors re-
sults in higher (on average) ratings than the absence of the
anchor (statistically significant with p<0.001).
Figure 3. Mean of the responses bootstrapped with 95% confidence in-
tervals across setups 1 and setup 2
Figure 4 presents ratings for the metrics of readability and
coherence separately. We find that across both setups, the dif-
ference between anchor and no anchor conditions to be larger
for the metrics of readability than coherence (statistically sig-
nificant with p<0.001). We find that in Setup 1, readability
values have a mean of 83.13 in the anchor condition and in
no anchor condition the mean of the responses drop down to
64.97. Also in Setup 1, we find that for coherence metric,
the mean of responses in the anchoring condition is M=62.74
and without anchor M=52.89. We find similar trends in the
responses provided in Setup 2 for both metrics of readability
and coherence.
Effect of time taken to complete task on magnitude of ratings
We analyze the effects of time taken to complete the task
on magnitude of ratings. We find that participants who are
presented with anchors spend more time on average taking
the study than participants in no anchor conditions across
both setups. From the total of 77 participants, the mean time
taken to complete the study was 57.17 minutes (see Figure 5).
In Setup 1, we find that participants took an average of 66
minutes in the with anchor condition and average of 54.83
minutes in the without anchor conditions. Similarly, in Setup
2 we find participants took an average of 54.94 minutes with
anchor condition and 50.94 with no anchor condition.
Figure 4. Mean of the responses bootstrapped with 95% confidence in-
tervals across Setups 1 and 2 on the metrics of Readability and Coher-
ence.
Below Average Above Average
Setup 1
No Achor 7 (71.19) 11 (39.65)
Anchor 11 (73.53) 11 (72.35)
Setup 2
No Anchor 4 (61.96) 14 (58.75)
Anchor 5 (64.02) 14 (83)
Table 4. Number of the participants who spent below and above average
time across conditions and their average rating values (in parenthesis)
Next, we grouped the participants based on the amount of time
spent into two categories: (1) Below Average - when partici-
pants spend less than mean time; (2) Above Average - when
participants spend more than mean time. Table 4 provides
the number of participants based on the time spent across the
experiment conditions. Across both setups, we find that peo-
ple in the above average group show significant differences
in their responses. In Setup 1, in the above average group,
the mean of responses in no anchor condition was 39.65 and
mean of the responses in anchor condition was 72.35. We find
similar evidence in Setup 2 with people in anchor condition
provide higher values (83) close to the numerical anchor (100).
Although, we note that the sample sizes in the Below Average
time taken groups in Setup 2 are smaller (4 and 5 participants
resp., c.f. Table 4); more experimentation is needed to further
substantiate this finding.
Effect of prior experience on magnitude of ratings
Figure 7 demonstrates the impact of the prior experience of
evaluating conversational responses (Question 1 on the pre-
questionnaire) on the magnitude of ratings. We find con-
trasting responses across both setups. In Setup 1, we find
Figure 5. Average time taken to complete the task across four experi-
ment conditions. Overall average is shown in dashed line in the graph
(57.17 minutes).
that people with prior experience in the anchor condition pro-
duce higher responses (M=74.41) close to the numerical an-
chor (100) and no anchor condition produce lower values
(M=38.36) whilst people with no prior experience are similar
in their responses across both conditions. In comparison to
Setup 1, we find that in Setup 2 participants with no prior
experience produce higher responses in the anchor condition
(M=71.45) and in no anchor condition (M=63.74).
Figure 8 shows the impact of prior experience of interacting
with chatbots. Participants who have such prior experience
demonstrated signs of anchoring. We find that mean of re-
sponses (M=80.40) for participants with prior experience in
the anchor condition to be significantly higher (p < 0.001)
than participants in no anchor condition (M=48.01) in Setup
1.
When comparing against Setup 1, we find that people in
Setup 2 with no prior experience produce higher responses
(M=70.74) in the anchoring condition than in the no anchor
condition (M=63.12).
These findings substantiate the hypothesis that people with
prior experience (answered Yes on Questions 1 and 2) would
be more susceptible to the anchoring effect than those who
do not have prior experience with similar tasks, however this
effect is only seen in Setup 1, while Setup 2 demonstrates the
opposite effect. We find this evidence to be particularly inter-
esting and plan to further investigate the potential of eliciting
ratings on different metrics as separate tasks (Setup 2) as a
means of mitigating the anchoring bias effect.
Analysis and Results for RQ2
We measure consistency of ratings using the intra-class cor-
relation measure (ICC) [34]. Following Bard et al. [7], we
perform a log normalization of the scores obtained using mag-
nitude estimation method across both setups.
Effects of anchor and type of setup on consistency of ratings
Table 5 represents the ICC scores obtained across both setups
on the metrics of readability and coherence. We find that there
is a significant (p < 0.001) increase in the consistency of the
Figure 6. Mean of the responses bootstrapped with 95% confidence in-
tervals across Setups 1 and 2 based on amount of time spent on study.
ratings in the anchor condition in Setup 1. The consistency
values obtained in Setup 2 for readability and coherence show
mixed results. We find that the no anchor condition of Setup
2 produces more consistency in ratings for the readability
metrics whilst on the metric of coherence, we find that there
is extremely low consistency between the raters when they
are presented with no anchors. However, we see a significant
increase in consistency for Setup 2, when participants are in
anchoring condition.
Readability Coherence
Setup 1
No Anchor (n=18) 0.74 0.76
Anchor (n=22) 0.921 0.855
Setup 2
No Anchor (n=18) 0.874 0.151
Anchor (n=19) 0.835 0.727
Table 5. ICC scores on the metrics of readability and coherence for
each experiment condition. All values are statistically significant p-
value<0.001
Effect of time taken to complete task on consistency of ratings
We look at the role of external factors of time and prior expe-
rience towards consistency of the ratings provided. Table 6
represents the ICC scores on the metrics on readability and
coherence across both setups. We group these participants into
two groups of Above Average and Below Average based on
the amount of time spent in the study (c.f Table 4).
Surprisingly, we find that people who spend below average
time achieve higher consistency in the ratings across both
setups. However, we do notice some differences between the
two setups. In Setup 1, we find that amongst participants
who are in the below average group, the participants in the
Figure 7. Mean of the responses bootstrapped with 95% confidence in-
tervals across setups 1 and setup 2 based on prior experience of being
involved studies about evaluating conversations.
anchor condition have a higher consistency than participants
in no anchor condition. Similarly, we find that people who
spend above average time on Setup 1 with anchor condition
achieve higher consistency when compared to Setup 1 with no
anchor condition for the above average group. However, in
Setup 2 we find people who spend above average time have a
poor consistency score on the metric of coherence, a possible
indication that coherence is highly subjective.
Effect of prior experience on consistency of ratings
Table 7 provides an overview of the consistency on the read-
ability and coherence metrics based on participants prior ex-
perience about taking part in studies about evaluating conver-
sations across both setups. We find that participants with no
prior experience of evaluating conversation across both setups
tend to have higher consistency when compared to participants
with prior experience of evaluating conversations irrespective
on experimental condition assigned. When compared within
the anchor conditions across both setups, we find that partic-
ipants with no prior experience of evaluating conversations
achieve higher consistency in Setup 2 and participants with
prior experiences of evaluating conversations achieve a higher
consistency on readability metrics with Setup 1.
Table 8 gives an overview of the consistency on the readability
and coherence metrics based on participants prior experience
of taking part in studies related to engagement with a chatbot.
Compared to Table 7, we find that participants with prior ex-
perience of engaging with chatbots achieve higher consistency
across both setups irrespective of the experiment condition
except on the Setup 2 anchoring condition. Also, we find
the anchoring condition enables participants to achieve higher
consistency across both Setup 1 and Setup 2. We find that
Figure 8. Mean of the responses bootstrapped with 95% confidence in-
tervals across setups 1 and setup 2 based on prior experience of being
involved studies about talking to chatbot.
irrespective of the participants’ prior experience, anchoring
helps achieve a higher consistency. This also provides similar
evidence to presence of anchoring helping towards achieving
higher consistency in this experiment design. Tables with con-
fidence intervals for Figures 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 are included in
our github repository.
Analysis and Results for RQ3
As shown in Table 5, we see that readability has a higher con-
sistency over coherence on both setups. We also notice the
significant impact anchoring has towards increasing consis-
tency of ratings. We see that it seems harder to agree upon the
more subjective metric of coherence, without any textual or
numerical anchor. We also suspect the impact of instructions
might have towards consistency. In the instructions screen in
our study, Readability was defined as: Is the response easy
to understand, fluent and grammatical and does not have any
consecutive repeating words (following [45, 46]), which pro-
vides clear indicators regarding evaluating a response on the
metric of readability. Coherence was defined as: Is the re-
sponse relevant to the topic and context of the conversation.
(following [20, 57] making it more subjective.
DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
In this section, we discuss implications of our results on an-
choring effect in dialogue evaluation, and point out possible
limitations related to the study design and analysis.
Implication of experiment results
Our key findings indicate that the presence of numerical and
textual anchors significantly influences the ratings across two
Condition Time Taken Readability Coherence
Setup 1
No Anchor
Below Average
(n=11)
0.75 0.63
Above Average
(n=7)
0.23 0.59
Setup 1
Anchor
Below Average
(n=11)
0.86 0.785
Above Average
(n=11)
0.83 0.68
Setup 2
No Anchor
Below Average
(n=14)
0.85 -0.03†.
Above Average
(n=4)
0†. 0†.
Setup 2
Anchor
Below Average
(n=14)
0.726 0.76
Above Average
(n=5)
0.556 -0.20†.
Table 6. ICC scores on the metrics of readability and coherence based on
the amount of time spent in the study across both conditions. All values
statistically significant at p-value<0.001 except those indicated by †.
different experiment setups. We find the effect of anchoring
is more pronounced in instances when participants are asked
to provide ratings on two metrics at the same time (Both
Questions/Setup 1) and the effect of anchoring is slightly less
pronounced when participants are asked to provide ratings for
a single metric on a single screen (Single Question/Setup 2).
Our findings have implications for potential future experiment
designs that are geared towards evaluating the performance of
dialogue systems, if there are ratings to be elicited on multiple
dimensions, such as Readability and Coherence.
Additionally, external factors of time taken to complete the
study and participants prior experience of having taken part in
research studies either about evaluation or engagement with a
chatbot were found to impact the magnitude of the responses
and consistency in the ratings. We find participants who spend
more than the average time (above average) on the study get
anchored and also exhibit low consistency scores on the met-
rics of readability and coherence.
We notice the choice of metrics to evaluate also has an impact
on consistency. We see that ratings for the more subjective met-
ric of coherence are less consistent than those for readability
amongst the raters across all conditions and setups.
We also analyzed the data from the post-questionnaire ques-
tions asking participants which method of rating they preferred
to work with. From the 77 participants, we find that 42 par-
ticipants preferred the magnitude estimation method and 35
of them preferred the Likert scale method. Prior research has
shown that continuous scale methods like magnitude estima-
tion do offer advantages [10, 46] and they need to be explored
further for the purposes of evaluation. Consistent with the prior
work in this area, we also find similar advantages provided by
magnitude estimation across both our setups with an increase
Condition
Prior experience
evaluating
conversations?
Readability Coherence
Setup 1
No Anchor
Yes (n=5) 0.44 0.71
No (n=13) 0.67 0.62
Setup 1
Anchor
Yes ((n=4) 0.61 0.52
No (n=18) 0.91 0.84
Setup 2
No Anchor
Yes (n=7) 0.77 -0.88†
No (n=11) 0.71 0.46
Setup 2
Anchor
Yes (n=6) -0.2† 0.65
No (n=13) 0.93 0.86
Table 7. ICC scores on the metrics of readability and coherence when
based of participants prior experience of taking part in research studies
about evaluating conversations. All values statistically significant at p-
value<0.001 except those indicated by †.
Condition
Prior experience
interacting with
chatbots?
Readability Coherence
Setup 1
No Anchor
Yes (n=5) 0.73 0.75
No (n=13) 0.55 0.58
Setup 1
Anchor
Yes ((n=5) 0.89 0.69
No (n=17) 0.87 0.79
Setup 2
No Anchor
Yes (n=8) 0.85 -0.163†
No (n=10) 0.58 -0.48
Setup 2
Anchor
Yes (n=7) -0.2† 0.49
No (n=12) 0.91 0.82
Table 8. ICC scores on the metrics of readability and coherence when
based of participants prior experience of taking part in research studies
talking to chatbot. All values statistically significant at p-value<0.001
except those indicated by †.
in consistency of the ratings provided by the crowd-sourced
workers. These findings and the participants’ feedback on their
own preferences lead us to recommend magnitude estimation
for future evaluation design of conversational agents.
Limitations
We acknowledge a few limitations of our work. First, we con-
sider only two metrics for evaluation of conversational agents.
In reality, there may be more metrics that are better designed
to evaluate the performance of conversational agents. Second,
we acknowledge that this study is exploratory; understanding
the impact of anchoring bias in the evaluation of conversa-
tional agents is in its infancy. For future studies, we plan to
pre-register our study to improve the validity of our findings
[33]. Third, we study the effect of anchoring, however, we
provide both numerical and textual anchors. Although we
find the impact of anchoring, we are unable to determine if
the numerical or the textual anchor is causing this effect. To
address this, we are planning an extension study with addi-
Figure 9. Participant ratings on which metrics they considered impor-
tant for conversational output evaluation. Y-axis represents the % of
importance.
tional experiment conditions so that we can study the impact
of textual and numerical anchors separately.
Future Work
The results of our study offer insights into the challenging
task of designing and understanding the impact of experiments
for evaluation of dialogue systems. To provide additional in-
formation for possible future directions, we also asked the
participants in our study to rank the metrics that they consid-
ered important for output of conversational agents (Figure 9),
including Readability and Coherence. We ask them to rate
their preferences in order of importance for the following met-
rics: Readability, Coherence, Novelty, Diversity, Specificity
and Engagement. These metrics are some of the commonly
used metrics in research articles that develop and evaluate
conversational agent output. We notice that readability and co-
herence are considered very important, but other metrics such
as engagement and specificity are also worth investigating.
Possible extensions to our work would include specificity and
engagement metrics, based on this evidence. Past research by
See et al. [49] specifies metrics including specificity and en-
gagement/interestingness and shows how these metrics could
impact the training process of a model.
SUMMARY
Evaluation of dialogue systems is an extremely challenging
task since automated metrics do not adequately capture the nu-
ances related to natural language and its production. However,
prior research has not focused on the impact that experiment
design has on qualitative dialogue evaluation.
Our findings are a step towards understanding the impact of ex-
periment design and the possible role of cognitive bias such as
anchoring bias towards dialogue evaluation. Cognitive biases
could be the result of System 1 thinking (Type 1 processing),
which is considered to be relatively fast, relatively low on cog-
nitive demand, often based on intuition. By contrast, System 2
thinking (or Type 2 processing), is considered to be the result
of systematic thinking and reasoning. Our results, however,
indicate that participants who spent less time on the task had
higher consistency of ratings than those who took longer. One
possible experiment to identify the effects of Type 1 vs. Type
2 processing is to design an experiment condition which ex-
plicitly triggers intuitive responses (Type 1) by imposing a
strict and challenging response deadline. Bago and De Neys
[3] observed in their experiments that participants gave correct,
logical responses as the first, immediate response, by explicitly
triggering Type 1 vs. Type 2 processing for logic problems.
Capturing time taken per question in the interaction logs would
allow us to collect the data that supports this investigation.
We specifically investigate impact of anchoring bias in our
experiment, to determine its effects on the consistency measure
across participants. By separately analyzing the effect of the
presence/absence of anchors and also the presentation order
of questions, we are able to make design recommendations
for future experiments on dialogue evaluation. We focus on
the metrics of readability and coherence, but our proposed
experiment design can be extended to multiple other metrics.
In addition, our study also suggests that external factors of
time and prior experience of taking part in research studies
about evaluation of responses and engagement with chatbots
have a significant impact towards responses provided and also
on consistency.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) under Contract No FA8650-18-C-
7881. All statements of fact, opinion or conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be construed as
representing the official views or policies of AFRL, DARPA,
or the U.S. Government. We thank the anonymous reviewers
for the helpful feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] Dan Ariely, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec.
2003. “Coherent arbitrariness”: Stable demand curves
without stable preferences. The Quarterly journal of
economics 118, 1 (2003), 73–106.
[2] Nabiha Asghar, Pascal Poupart, Jesse Hoey, Xin Jiang,
and Lili Mou. 2018. Affective Neural Response
Generation. In European Conference on Information
Retrieval. Springer, 154–166.
[3] Bence Bago and Wim De Neys. 2017. Fast logic?:
Examining the time course assumption of dual process
theory. Cognition 158 (2017), 90–109.
[4] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[5] Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of
the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation
measures for machine translation and/or summarization.
65–72.
[6] Srinivas Bangalore and Owen Rambow. 2000.
Corpus-based Lexical Choice in Natural Language
Generation. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting
on Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL ’00).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA, 464–471. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1075218.1075277
[7] Ellen Gurman Bard, Dan Robertson, and Antonella
Sorace. 1996. Magnitude estimation of linguistic
acceptability. Language (1996), 32–68.
[8] Hans Baumgartner and Jan-Benedict EM Steenkamp.
2001. Response styles in marketing research: A
cross-national investigation. Journal of marketing
research 38, 2 (2001), 143–156.
[9] Anja Belz and Eric Kow. 2010. Comparing rating scales
and preference judgements in language evaluation. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Natural Language
Generation Conference. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 7–15.
[10] Anja Belz and Eric Kow. 2011. Discrete vs. continuous
rating scales for language evaluation in nlp. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies: short papers-Volume 2.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 230–235.
[11] Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and
Christian Jauvin. 2003. A neural probabilistic language
model. Journal of machine learning research 3, Feb
(2003), 1137–1155.
[12] Yevgeni Berzak, Yan Huang, Andrei Barbu, Anna
Korhonen, and Boris Katz. 2016. Anchoring and
Agreement in Syntactic Annotations. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Austin, Texas, 2215–2224. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/D16-1239
[13] Antoine Bordes, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston.
2016. Learning end-to-end goal-oriented dialog. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.07683 (2016).
[14] Hongshen Chen, Zhaochun Ren, Jiliang Tang,
Yihong Eric Zhao, and Dawei Yin. 2018. Hierarchical
variational memory network for dialogue generation. In
Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference on
World Wide Web. International World Wide Web
Conferences Steering Committee, 1653–1662.
[15] Isaac Cho, Ryan Wesslen, Ali Karduni, Sashank
Santhanam, Samira Shaikh, and Wenwen Dou. 2017.
The Anchoring Effect in Decision-Making with Visual
Analytics. In IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics
Science and Technology (VAST).
[16] Kenneth Mark Colby. 1975. Artificial paranoia: a
computer simulation of paranoid process. Pergamon
Press.
[17] Evanthia Dimara, Steven Franconeri, Catherine Plaisant,
Anastasia Bezerianos, and Pierre Dragicevic. 2018. A
task-based taxonomy of cognitive biases for information
visualization. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics (2018).
[18] Emily Dinan, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Angela Fan,
Michael Auli, and Jason Weston. 2018. Wizard of
Wikipedia: Knowledge-Powered Conversational agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01241 (2018).
[19] Nouha Dziri, Ehsan Kamalloo, Kory Mathewson, and
Osmar Zaiane. 2019. Evaluating Coherence in Dialogue
Systems using Entailment. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 3806–3812. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1381
[20] Nouha Dziri, Ehsan Kamalloo, Kory W Mathewson, and
Osmar Zaiane. 2018. Augmenting Neural Response
Generation with Context-Aware Topical Attention. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.01063 (2018).
[21] Geoffrey Ellis. 2018. Cognitive Biases in Visualizations.
Springer.
[22] Adrian Furnham and Hua Chu Boo. 2011. A literature
review of the anchoring effect. The Journal of
Socio-Economics 40, 1 (2011), 35–42.
[23] Albert Gatt and Emiel Krahmer. 2018. Survey of the
State of the Art in Natural Language Generation: Core
Tasks, Applications and Evaluation. J. Artif. Int. Res. 61,
1 (Jan. 2018), 65–170.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3241691.3241693
[24] Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei
Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and
Michel Galley. 2018. A knowledge-grounded neural
conversation model. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence.
[25] T Gilovich, N Robert, and A Amos. 2001. Putting
adjustment back into the anchoring and adjustment
heuristic: Differential processing of self-generated and
experimenterprovided anchors. Psychological Science
(2001).
[26] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. Neural computation 9, 8 (1997),
1735–1780.
[27] Matthew Hoffman, Francis R Bach, and David M Blei.
2010. Online learning for latent dirichlet allocation. In
advances in neural information processing systems.
856–864.
[28] Daniel Kahneman. 2003. A perspective on judgment and
choice: mapping bounded rationality. American
psychologist 58, 9 (2003), 697.
[29] Daniel Kahneman. 2016. 36 Heuristics and Biases.
Scientists Making a Difference: One Hundred Eminent
Behavioral and Brain Scientists Talk about Their Most
Important Contributions (2016), 171.
[30] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. 1972. Subjective
probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive
psychology 3, 3 (1972), 430–454.
[31] J Peter Kincaid, Robert P Fishburne Jr, Richard L
Rogers, and Brad S Chissom. 1975. Derivation of new
readability formulas (automated readability index, fog
count and flesch reading ease formula) for navy enlisted
personnel. (1975).
[32] Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif Mohammad. 2017.
Best-Worst Scaling More Reliable than Rating Scales: A
Case Study on Sentiment Intensity Annotation. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 465–470. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2074
[33] Robert Kosara and Steve Haroz. 2018. Skipping the
Replication Crisis in Visualization: Threats to Study
Validity and How to Address Them. (2018).
[34] J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The
measurement of observer agreement for categorical data.
biometrics (1977), 159–174.
[35] Irene Langkilde-Geary and Kevin Knight. 2002.
Halogen statistical sentence generator. In Proceedings of
the ACL-02 Demonstrations Session. 102–103.
[36] Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao,
and Bill Dolan. 2016a. A Diversity-Promoting Objective
Function for Neural Conversation Models. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
Association for Computational Linguistics, San Diego,
California, 110–119. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/N16-1014
[37] Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky,
Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2016b. Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Dialogue Generation. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 1192–1202. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/D16-1127
[38] Xiujun Li, Yun-Nung Chen, Lihong Li, Jianfeng Gao,
and Asli Celikyilmaz. 2017. End-to-End
Task-Completion Neural Dialogue Systems. In
Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers). Asian Federation of Natural Language
Processing, Taipei, Taiwan, 733–743.
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/I17-1074
[39] Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries. Text Summarization Branches
Out (2004).
[40] Zachary Lipton, Xiujun Li, Jianfeng Gao, Lihong Li,
Faisal Ahmed, and Li Deng. 2018. Bbq-networks:
Efficient exploration in deep reinforcement learning for
task-oriented dialogue systems. In Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[41] Chia-Wei Liu, Ryan Lowe, Iulian Serban, Mike
Noseworthy, Laurent Charlin, and Joelle Pineau. 2016.
How NOT To Evaluate Your Dialogue System: An
Empirical Study of Unsupervised Evaluation Metrics for
Dialogue Response Generation. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2122–2132. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/D16-1230
[42] Ryan Lowe, Michael Noseworthy, Iulian Vlad Serban,
Nicolas Angelard-Gontier, Yoshua Bengio, and Joelle
Pineau. 2017. Towards an Automatic Turing Test:
Learning to Evaluate Dialogue Responses. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 1116–1126. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1103
[43] Susan W McRoy, Songsak Channarukul, and Syed S Ali.
2003. An augmented template-based approach to text
realization. Natural Language Engineering 9, 4 (2003),
381–420.
[44] Hongyuan Mei, Mohit Bansal, and Matthew R. Walter.
2017. Coherent Dialogue with Attention-Based
Language Models. In Proceedings of the National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI). San
Francisco, CA.
[45] Jekaterina Novikova, Ondřej Dušek, Amanda
Cercas Curry, and Verena Rieser. 2017. Why We Need
New Evaluation Metrics for NLG. In Proceedings of the
2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2241–2252. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1238
[46] Jekaterina Novikova, Ondřej Dušek, and Verena Rieser.
2018. RankME: Reliable Human Ratings for Natural
Language Generation. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers).
Association for Computational Linguistics, New
Orleans, Louisiana, 72–78. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-2012
[47] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting on association for computational
linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
311–318.
[48] Howard Schuman and Stanley Presser. 1996. Questions
and answers in attitude surveys: Experiments on
question form, wording, and context. Sage.
[49] Abigail See, Stephen Roller, Douwe Kiela, and Jason
Weston. 2019. What makes a good conversation? How
controllable attributes affect human judgments. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1702–1723. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1170
[50] Iulian Vlad Serban, Alessandro Sordoni, Yoshua Bengio,
Aaron C Courville, and Joelle Pineau. 2016. Building
End-To-End Dialogue Systems Using Generative
Hierarchical Neural Network Models.. In AAAI, Vol. 16.
3776–3784.
[51] Fabian Sperrle, Udo Schlegel, Mennatallah El-Assady,
and Daniel Keim. 2019. Human Trust Modeling for Bias
Mitigation in Artificial Intelligence. In ACM CHI 2019
Workshop: Where is the Human? Bridging the Gap
Between AI and HCI.
[52] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems.
3104–3112.
[53] Zhiliang Tian, Rui Yan, Lili Mou, Yiping Song, Yansong
Feng, and Dongyan Zhao. 2017. How to Make Context
More Useful? An Empirical Study on Context-Aware
Neural Conversational Models. In Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver,
Canada, 231–236. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2036
[54] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. Judgment
under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. science 185,
4157 (1974), 1124–1131.
[55] Kees van Deemter, Mariët Theune, and Emiel Krahmer.
2005. Real vs. template-based natural language
generation: a false opposition. Computational
Linguistics 31, 1 (2005), 15–24.
[56] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
5998–6008.
[57] Anu Venkatesh, Chandra Khatri, Ashwin Ram, Fenfei
Guo, Raefer Gabriel, Ashish Nagar, Rohit Prasad, Ming
Cheng, Behnam Hedayatnia, Angeliki Metallinou, and
others. 2018. On Evaluating and Comparing
Conversational Agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.03625 (2018).
[58] Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. 2015. A neural
conversational model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05869
(2015).
[59] Marilyn A Walker, Diane J Litman, Candace A Kamm,
and Alicia Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A framework for
evaluating spoken dialogue agents. In Proceedings of the
eighth conference on European chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 271–280.
[60] Danding Wang, Qian Yang, Ashraf Abdul, and Brian Y
Lim. 2019. Designing Theory-Driven User-Centric
Explainable AI. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 601.
[61] Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. ELIZAâĂŤa computer
program for the study of natural language
communication between man and machine. Commun.
ACM 9, 1 (1966), 36–45.
[62] R Wesslen, S Santhanam, A Karduni, I Cho, S Shaikh,
and W Dou. 2019. Investigating Effects of Visual
Anchors on Decision-Making about Misinformation. In
Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 38. Wiley Online
Library, 161–171.
[63] Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018.
Personalizing Dialogue Agents: I have a dog, do you
have pets too?. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Melbourne, Australia,
2204–2213. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1205
