Developing a Personality Model for Speech-based
Conversational Agents Using the Psycholexical Approach
Sarah Theres Völkel1, Ramona Schoedel1, Daniel Buschek2, Clemens Stachl3,
Verena Winterhalter1, Markus Bühner1, Heinrich Hussmann1
1LMU Munich, Munich, Germany; 2Research Group HCI + AI, Department of Computer Science,
University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany; 3Department of Communication, Stanford University,
Stanford, US
sarah.voelkel@ifi.lmu.de, ramona.schoedel@psy.lmu.de, daniel.buschek@uni-bayreuth.de,
cstachl@stanford.edu, verena.winterhalter@campus.lmu.de, buehner@psy.lmu.de, hussmann@ifi.lmu.de
ABSTRACT
We present the first systematic analysis of personality dimen-
sions developed specifically to describe the personality of
speech-based conversational agents. Following the psycholexi-
cal approach from psychology, we first report on a new multi-
method approach to collect potentially descriptive adjectives
from 1) a free description task in an online survey (228 unique
descriptors), 2) an interaction task in the lab (176 unique de-
scriptors), and 3) a text analysis of 30,000 online reviews of
conversational agents (Alexa, Google Assistant, Cortana) (383
unique descriptors). We aggregate the results into a set of 349
adjectives, which are then rated by 744 people in an online sur-
vey. A factor analysis reveals that the commonly used Big Five
model for human personality does not adequately describe
agent personality. As an initial step to developing a personality
model, we propose alternative dimensions and discuss impli-
cations for the design of agent personalities, personality-aware
personalisation, and future research.
Author Keywords
Big 5; conversational agents; personality.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in
HCI;
INTRODUCTION
Speech-based conversational agents have become increasingly
popular, often presented as helpful assistants in everyday tasks.
Due to their intended use and conversational nature, this type
of user interface seems much more likely to be seen as a be-
ing with a personality, compared to, for example, traditional
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA.
© 2020 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376210
GUIs [15, 41]. This is further facilitated by recent develop-
ments that try to mimic human behavioural characteristics,
such as casual filler sounds (“mmm”) on the phone [69].
Such developments highlight that assistants’ technical compe-
tence alone does not fulfill user needs, for example regarding
acceptability in social contexts, yet also considering usabil-
ity and user experience [3, 9, 53]: For instance, perceivable
personality traits may help to communicate to the users that
consistency in the agent’s reactions can be expected. Recent
consumer reports reveal that users particularly enjoy interact-
ing with voice assistants which exhibit a human-like personal-
ity [68]. More generally, integrating personality into rational
agent architectures has been motivated by striving towards
more complete cognitive models of agents, as well as sus-
taining more human-like interactions with people [9]. These
insights motivate the deliberate design of personalities for
speech-based conversational agents. However, systematically
designing agent personalities remains a challenge: For ex-
ample, conversational agents still struggle with generating
adequate human-like “chitchat” or humour [19, 60], which
often require demonstrations of (consistent) personality.
A crucial missing step towards realising these visions is a sci-
entific model to describe agent personality in the first place.
For example, researchers and UX designers could then use
such a model to systematically design target personalities for
their systems and applications. Moreover, while basic person-
ality design follows a one size-fits-all approach, future voice
assistants can be expected to also aim to adapt to the personal-
ity of the individual user. This further heightens the need for a
personality model on which such adaptation can be based.
As of today, no dedicated personality model for speech-based
conversational agents exists. Thus, most researchers have
turned to the Big Five personality taxonomy. Since this model
was developed for humans, it remains unclear if it is actually
suitable to describe agents. For example, the Big Five dimen-
sion of openness might be less applicable or important for
agents, while new dimensions might be necessary instead (e.g.
one capturing an aspect of artificiality). Moreover, the Big
Five taxonomy was developed with a psycholexical approach,
that is, using a set of adjectives collected for humans [21].
This set might not be adequate for conversational agents.
Recent work supports this view: Zhou et al. [70] openly asked
about personality of chatbots. Responses included adjectives
such as “robotic” which are clearly not covered by personality
descriptors in models for humans. Similarly, Perez et al. [58]
examined how users perceive brand personality of voice as-
sistants and found out that people attributed “technical” or
“logical” to these assistants.
We address this gap with the first systematic analysis of per-
sonality dimensions dedicated to speech-based conversational
agents as initial step to developing a personality model. We
focus on such agents (also named virtual personal assistants,
intelligent assistants, voice user interfaces) due to their preva-
lent and close interaction with users [60]. To find appropriate
personality descriptors and dimensions, we apply the psycho-
lexical approach from psychology.
In particular, we contribute a set of 349 personality descrip-
tors (adjectives), developed with a new multi-method strategy:
We combine data from a free description task (online survey,
228 unique descriptors), an interaction task (lab study, 176
unique descriptors), and a text analysis of 30,000 online re-
views of Alexa, Google Assistant, and Cortana, which yielded
383 unique descriptors. As an initial step to developing a per-
sonality model for speech-based conversational agents, we
contribute ten personality dimensions, derived via exploratory
factor analysis on data of 744 people rating our descriptors.
The found dimensions do not correspond to the human Big
Five – neither in number nor content. We discuss implica-
tions for future work and applications of our dimensions and
descriptors.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
Personality describes relatively stable individual characteristic
patterns of acting, feeling, and thinking [48]. Since these pat-
terns are latent traits they cannot be gauged directly. Hence,
adequate assessment of peoples’ personality has been a major
challenge in empirical psychology for a long time [44].
Test Construction Process
The creation of an instrument for assessing psychological con-
structs (e.g. personality traits) is subject to a complex and
multi-stage psychometric construction process [12,27]. The
Inductive strategy – used to develop human personality mod-
els [27] – assumes no elaborated theory a priori but merely
an idea of which items could represent the construct [12,27].
An item pool is created, rated by people, and analysed with
exploratory factor analysis [12]. This statistical method aims
to explain associations between items via a small number of
homogeneous factors. These factors (i.e. dimensions) can then
be used to develop a theoretical model [12].
A large item pool can be created with different methods [12]:
The experience-oriented-intuitive approach asks people to de-
termine indicators which best describe the construct based on
their expertise/intuitive understanding. Another approach is
the collection and analysis of definitions which reviews the
literature for indicators for the construct. The person-centred-
empirical approach focuses on embedding of the construct
in relation to similar constructs. Based on associations of per-
sonal characteristics and these constructs in existing literature
indicators for the construct of interest are derived. Finally,
the analytical-empirical approach uses standardised question-
naires, interviews, or observations to identify indicators rele-
vant of the construct [12]. Our multi-method strategy covers
multiple such approaches (cf. Our Approach Section).
Lexical Approach to Human Personality
The psycholexical approach [21,38] is the most established
and best known approach in psychology for developing a per-
sonality model for humans. It assumes that since people notice
and talk about individual differences, these “will eventually
become encoded into their language” [29].
Allport and Odbert [1, 38] collected a large set of 17,953
personality-related terms from a dictionary, Norman [56]
even identified 27,000 unique personality terms. Researchers
(e.g. [1,17,30,31,38,55,56]) reduced this by excluding un-
familiar, redundant, etc. terms based on expert and empirical
ratings. In the 1980s Goldberg merged and refined existing
lists [2, 32]. This resulted in 1,710 trait adjectives for self-
and peer-report [38]. Goldberg further reduced these to 339
trait adjectives, sorting out synonyms and excluding difficult,
slangy, ambiguous, and sex-related adjectives [29–31,38].
A drawback of dictionaries is that language use is not con-
sidered (e.g. word frequencies) [18]. Digital data has enabled
such new analyses and researchers have used self-narrative
texts to extract personality-describing words [18,42]. Our text
analysis of online reviews makes use of this idea.
The Five-Factor Model of Personality
The above presented adjective lists have widely been used as
basis for exploring the structure of human personality in previ-
ous research [38]. Despite various approaches to reduce trait
terms to few dimensions of human personality across different
adjective lists, the Big Five, also known as Five-Factor Model
or OCEAN, has emerged as the most prominent model in per-
sonality research [20,45,46]. This model comprises five broad
dimensions, which depict individuals’ tendencies of feeling,
thinking, and behaving [21,23,24,29,36,37,44,48–50]:
Openness relates to seeking new experiences, artistic interests,
creativity, and intellectual curiosity. Conscientiousness relates
to being thorough, organised, neat, reliable, careful, and re-
sponsible. Extraversion relates to being outgoing, sociable, ac-
tive, and assertive in social interactions. Agreeableness relates
to being friendly, helpful, socially harmonic, kind, trusting,
and cooperative. Neuroticism relates to emotional stability and
experiencing anxiety, negative affect, stress, and depression.
Despite the popularity of the Big Five, personality models
are not without limitations. The assessment of personality di-
mensions via self-report questionnaires is subject to a certain
measurement error [28]. For example, response biases due to
social desirability have been reported [71]. Although the Big
Five are relatively robust across cultures, there is some contro-
versy whether the model is best suited to describe personality
in all cultures.
Describing Agent Personality in HCI
Humans attribute personality to other humans based on per-
ceptible traces of feelings, thoughts, and behaviour [65]. Ac-
cording to the Media Equation [62], people tend to imitate this
behaviour for machines and unconsciously assign them per-
sonality as well. For example, related work suggests that users
make similar personality inferences for speech-based conversa-
tional agents as for humans [15,35,41,51,54]. More generally,
acceptance and credibility of virtual agents are determined by
their abilities to be perceived as having a consistent and coher-
ent personality [3,51,53,67]. This fundamentally motivates
designing agent personality from an HCI perspective.
Today, speech-based conversational agents are most promi-
nently deployed in intelligent personal assistants, such as
Google Assistant, Apple’s Siri, Microsoft’s Cortana, and Ama-
zon’s Alexa. Commercially available conversational agents are
increasingly used in smart speakers for home automation, e.g.
Amazon Echo or Google Home [60], as well as in automotive
user interfaces [11]. In research, conversational agents have
for example been developed to give health advice to users [22]
or serve as social companion for older adults [59]. Braun et
al. [11] showed that users liked and trusted voice assistants
more if their personality was matched to the user’s own person-
ality. Based on their use context, speech-based conversational
agents are likely to show a different personality. For example,
a speech-based conversational agent which answers calls at
an insurance company might be designed to be reliable and
trustworthy. In contrast, a conversational agent in a sports car
could be designed as helpful, enthusiastic, and funny.
McRorie et al. [51] created speech-based conversational agents
based on Eysenck’s Three-Factor Model, using behavioural
personality cues from the literature. Using a short version of
Eysenck’s questionnaire, they found that people perceived the
agents as intended. Others used the Big Five model: Several
researchers focused on extraversion which has the strongest
links to observable behaviour [35,41]. For example, Cafaro et
al. [15] evaluated perceived extraversion and friendliness of
a virtual museum guide. Moreover, Neff et al.’s findings [54]
indicated that users recognise neuroticism in virtual agents.
These projects used questionnaires for human personality to
evaluate people’s perception of agent personality [16,35,41,
54]. The examples show that perceived agent personality can
be deliberately shaped. Yet it is unclear if dimensions of human
personality are best suited to inform this since there is no
alternative set of dimensions for agents.
Another line of research worked on frameworks for support-
ing implementation of agent personality: For example, the
SOAR (State, Operator And Result) architecture was one of
the first attempts to model agent behaviour. The psycholog-
ical reasoning model BDI (Beliefs, Desires, Intentions) em-
ploys personality traits to decide between multiple goals of an
agent [61, 64]. Moreover, Bouchet and Sansonnet [9] devel-
oped a computationally-oriented taxonomy for implementing
personality traits in voice agents. These frameworks all relied
on existing personality models for humans.
In summary, the literature shows example agents with distinc-
tive personality and also frameworks that aim to support their
development – all using human personality models. To the best
of our knowledge there is no systematic analysis of whether
such human models are applicable and sufficiently compre-
hensive when describing speech-based conversational agent
personality. This motivates our investigations in this paper.
There are reasons to expect differences in personality models
suitable for humans vs agents: Prior work on human-robot
interaction suggests that that there are limitations of the Me-
dia Equation since humans conceptualise robots somewhere
between alive and lifeless [6], and the perception of human-
ness in virtual assistants is a multidimensional construct [25].
Furthermore, in an open description of a chatbot’s personality,
users mentioned descriptors which are not present in the Big
Five model, such as robotic [70]. Since personality is supposed
to reflect distinctive traits, further dimensions beyond those
in human models might be necessary to sufficiently describe
agents. This motivates our work on developing a personality
model for such agents.
OUR APPROACH
Similar to the traditional psycholexical approach in psychol-
ogy, we implemented two steps to derive personality dimen-
sions: (1) Item Pool Generation, in which unique phrases
for describing personality are collected, and (2) Exploratory
Factor Analysis, which explores structure and relationship
between the items.
Item Pool Generation
The first step finds (English) terms that can “distinguish the
behavio[u]r of one human being from that of another one” [1].
We seek such terms for agents. As adjectives “are used to
describe qualities of objects and persons” [21] we limit our
set to adjectives, as in prior work [30,55]. We refer to these
resulting terms as descriptors.
How to best compile a set of descriptors is a key challenge
of this approach [21]. Inspired by traditional test construction
theory [12], we use a new multi-method approach to collect
potential descriptors:
1. An online survey, in which N=135 participants named de-
scriptors for a chosen voice assistant in a free description
task (Experience-oriented-intuitive approach).
2. A lab experiment, in which N=30 people interacted with
agents (Siri, Alexa, Google Assistant) and described their
personality afterwards (Analytical-empirical approach).
3. A text analysis of 30,000 online reviews of agents (Alexa,
Google Assistant, Cortana) (Narrative approach).
Since conceptually it is not important how often a descriptor
occurs, we collected all unique adjectives regardless of occur-
rence frequency. We joined the three sets with a given list of
descriptors for human personality by Goldberg [31]. We then
aggregated the results into a set of 349 adjectives by (1) ap-
plying pre-defined exclusion criteria, (2) clustering synonyms,
Online survey Interaction experiment
helpful 34% helpful 90%
friendly 24% friendly 67%
funny 19% pleasant 53%
polite 13% funny 37%
nice 13% likeable 37%
annoying 9% nice 37%
calm 9% jolly 33%
cold 7% polite 33%
intelligent 7% unpleasant 33%
fast 6% human 30%
Table 1. Top ten descriptors mentioned by participants to describe
speech-based conversational agents in the online survey (left, N=135)
and the interaction experiment (right, N=30). Percentages refer to num-
ber of people in the respective study who named each descriptor.
and (3) selecting descriptors based on word-frequency and
ambiguity.
Exploratory Factor Analysis
In this second step, N=744 people rated one of the three most
popular assistants (Alexa, Google Assistant, Siri) on the re-
sulting 349 adjectives in an online survey. Exploratory factor
analysis on these ratings then revealed latent personality di-
mensions.
DESCRIPTORS 1: ONLINE SURVEY
Research Design
We conducted an online survey to establish a first collection
of descriptors for speech-based conversational voice agents.
The survey allowed us to get an initial overview to inform sub-
sequent steps; it thus comprised three parts: First, people were
asked to indicate with which agents they had interacted be-
fore (Siri, Alexa, Google Assistant, Cortana, Samsung Bixby,
potential others). Second, participants were asked to provide
five representative adjectives to describe the personality of
one speech-based conversational agent. Third, participants
provided demographic information.
Data Analysis
We corrected typos (e.g. helfpul to helpful), replaced nouns
with adjective versions where possible (e.g. fun to funny), and
simplified multiple word expressions (e.g. sometimes annoying
to annoying). Furthermore, we excluded all answers which
referred to an evaluation of outward appearance (e.g. good
looking) or usage (e.g. I don’t use it) instead of personality, as
well as further unrelated phrases (e.g. home button).
Participants
We recruited participants via university mailing lists, so-
cial media, and online survey communities: 135 participants
completed the survey (71.1% female; mean age 26.2 years,
range 18-68 years). 31.1% of participants had interacted with
Alexa before, 69.7% with Siri, 32.3% with Cortana, 44.4%
with Google Assistant, and 5.2% with Samsung Bixby. Only
one participant mentioned additional experience with another
speech-based conversational agent (BMW Car Assistant).
Results
Our analysis yielded 228 unique descriptors (adjectives):
68.7% of these were mentioned once. Only five were stated
by more than 10% of people (cf. Table 1). In contrast to tradi-
tional descriptors for human personality, this set also included
adjectives such as robotic, (in)human, or impersonal.
DESCRIPTORS 2: INTERACTION EXPERIMENT
Research Design
As another approach to collecting descriptors of speech-based
conversational agents, we conducted a lab experiment with
an interaction task: Here, our goal was to elicit descriptions
directly after participants had interacted with such agents. In
particular, we followed a within-groups design, where each
participant interacted with three voice assistants (Siri, Alexa,
and Google Assistant).
For each assistant, we asked participants to perform seven
tasks, for example to send a message, play a song, or tell a joke.
These tasks were informed by related work which analysed
the most popular requests to voice assistants at home [40]. We
counterbalanced the order of assistants and interaction tasks.
Interviews followed: To allow participants to become familiar
with describing personality characteristics, we first asked them
to describe the personality of a friend or family member. Then,
after each interaction, participants described the personality of
the respective speech-based conversational agent. At the end,
they filled in a short questionnaire for demographic data. The
experiment took between 45 and 60 minutes.
Data Analysis
We transcribed the interviews and collected all descriptors
from the transcripts. Since the interviews were conducted in
participants’ native language, two authors individually trans-
lated all descriptors, then cross-checked the translations. For
standardisation, we turned negations into the corresponding
antonyms (e.g. not funny to unfunny).
Participants
The sample consisted of N=30 participants (73.3% female;
mean age 24.5 years, range 18-39 years), which were recruited
via university mailing lists and personal contacts. 93.3% of
participants knew Siri, 90% Alexa, 90% Google Assistant,
and 36.7% Cortana respectively before the study. 87% of
participants interacted at least once with a voice assistant
before, and 50% more than once a week.
Results
The experiment resulted in 176 unique descriptors. Of those
176 descriptors, 110 descriptors were new compared to study
one. Again, a majority of descriptors (50.9%) was only men-
tioned once. The top ten descriptors can be found in Table 1.
Some of the most frequently used descriptors overlap with the
ones from the online survey. However, it is interesting to note
that more positive affective descriptors were included in the
top ten list, such as likable and jolly.
DESCRIPTORS 3: TEXT MINING ON ONLINE REVIEWS
Data Acquisition
In the first two studies, we collected descriptors by explicitly
enquiring people about personality traits. In this third study we
examined user reviews for descriptors, in order to also include
implicit depictions of personality in everyday language use
and to cover a wider sample. Reviews provide an interesting
source as they reflect users’ (emotional) experience with an
application [26,33,43]. Following related work [26], we built a
web crawler to scrape the latest 10,000 US Google Play Store
reviews for Google Assistant, Alexa, and Cortana respectively.
We did not include Siri since it is not available in such a store.
Data Processing and Analysis
Inspired by related work [26] on users’ problems with in-
telligent everyday applications, we combined automatic and
manual analysis: We first used the Python Natural Language
Toolkit1 (NLTK) to automatically extract all adjectives and
adverbs from reviews. This resulted in 794 terms for Google
Assistant, 913 terms for Cortana, and 1,068 terms for Alexa
(incl. intersections).
Adjectives in reviews might not only reflect users’ evaluation
of personality but also refer to specific features (e.g. “sucky
recognition technology” or to describe the user (e.g. “this
problem makes me angry”. Therefore, two authors manually
examined all adjectives by going through a random set of
reviews per adjective to decide whether this adjective qualified
as a descriptor. We excluded descriptors which refer to a state
rather than a stable trait (e.g. “offline”). For the majority of
adjectives, up to twenty reviews were sufficient to decide on
exclusion. Overall, we included adjectives favourably since
our aim was to generate a comprehensive pool of descriptors.
Thus, if it was not clear whether an adjective described the
speech-based conversational agent or a specific feature, we
included it (e.g. “very useful”).
With these criteria, two authors independently went through a
random set of hundred adjectives for Google Assistant (corre-
sponds to 886 reviews). The interrater agreement was Cohen’s
κ = 0.82. We then compared the results and discussed dis-
crepancies until consensus was reached. The remaining 694
adjectives were split evenly among raters. We repeated this for
Alexa and Cortana: Here, we only analysed adjectives which
had not been already included for Google Assistant. Again,
to ensure interrater consistency, two authors both rated the
first 50 adjectives for Alexa and Cortana, respectively. The
interrater agreement was κ = 0.92 for Alexa and κ = 0.91 for
Cortana. Afterwards, reviews were again split among raters.
Results
Our analysis yielded 383 unique descriptors; 288 of those were
not included in the set from studies one and two. Examples
include busy, clunky, inoperable, laggy, magical, philosophi-
cal, romantic, temperamental, usable, virtual. Given that many
reviews are short or only repeat the star rating [26, 43], the
number of adjectives seems adequate despite the high number
of analysed reviews. Furthermore, we noted that few adjec-
tives occur very frequently (e.g. helpful was included in 236
Cortana reviews), while the majority of adjectives appears
only occasionally. Since an adjective can occur n times over
1www.nltk.org
116
89
38
288
46 21
28
Online survey Lab study
Text analysis
Figure 1. Overview of the candidate descriptors before refinement, as
collected with each method and with multiple such methods. The figure
shows the value of our multi-method approach: Each of the three meth-
ods added new descriptors not found by the others.
all 30,000 reviews but may only be used i ≤ n times as a de-
scriptor for personality, we deem it not meaningful to show a
frequency distribution here.
FINAL SET OF DESCRIPTORS
As a visual overview, Figure 1 shows our three obtained sets of
candidates (i.e. descriptors before final selection). It is striking
that the descriptors collected in the three different methods
show only small overlaps. While 28 descriptors were named
in all three methods, 493 descriptors were only found in one
of the three approaches. We will discuss the implications of
this small overlap in the Discussion section. Next we describe
how we derived the final set.
Adding Existing Descriptors for Human Personality
We also accounted for the possibility that traditional human
personality descriptors may be suitable to describe speech-
based conversational agents. Hence, we merged our set with
Goldberg’s established list of 339 adjectives for human per-
sonality [31]. We chose Goldberg’s list instead of using the
items of personality questionnaires such as the Revised NEO
Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) [20] or the Big Five Struc-
ture Inventory (BFSI) [5] since Goldberg’s items are openly
published so that other researchers can build their work on our
item list. The resulting list comprised 870 descriptors.
Refining the Set by Established Exclusion Criteria
We refined this list in several iterations. In line with the con-
struction of traditional personality inventories in psychol-
ogy [30, 55], we applied the following exclusion criteria:
slanginess (e.g. hot, screwy, snotty); difficulty (e.g. antagonis-
tic, opportunistic, phlegmatic); ambiguity (e.g. cool, snappy);
link to sex, gender, demographics (e.g. well educated, feminine,
genderless); over-evaluation (e.g. awesome, sucky, crappy);
peripheral terms (e.g. dry-witted, pseudo-friendly); anatomical
or physical characteristics (e.g. bulky, small, beautiful).
In addition, we also excluded all expressions which refer to
the impression on the user rather than the agent’s personality
(e.g. we include bored but exclude boring). Finally, in case of
lexical opposites (e.g. dishonest and honest), we only include
the positive form since negations have been shown to easily
be misunderstood [27]. All exclusion choices were discussed
by two researchers and only applied in case of agreement.
Refining the Set via Synonym Clusters
The previous steps resulted in 592 descriptors. Since even
comprehensive personality questionnaires usually comprise
no more than 300 items for practical reasons [5,20], we further
reduced the set by removing synonyms. This is an established
step in related work: Goldberg [30] and Norman [55] both
used expert ratings to exclude redundant terms.In our case, we
instead used a combination of automatic synonym clustering
and manual analysis, as described next.
Specifying Synonyms
Clustering first required us to specify a list of synonyms for
each descriptor. At first, we tried to do so using the lexical
database Word Net [52]. However, the resulting list of syn-
onyms for each word comprised several meanings of that word
such that many synonym clusters were not meaningful (e.g.
practical, pragmatic, virtual).
Therefore, we turned to the online Merriam Webster the-
saurus2, which provides word definitions and synonyms sepa-
rately for all meanings of a word. We scraped this information.
Two authors then manually went through all definitions to
compile a list that only included those definitions of a word
which are meaningful in the context of personality description.
For example, for the descriptor cold we included the synonyms
for the definition “having or showing a lack of friendliness or
interest in others” but not for “having a low or subnormal tem-
perature”3. In case a word had n > 1 valid definitions in this
context, we added it n times, with indices (1...n). This allowed
us to distinguish between the definitions after the clustering.
Clustering by Synonyms
We sorted the descriptors by word frequency in the English lan-
guage with wordfreq [66]. This allowed us to favour frequently
used and thus well-known descriptors over unfamiliar expres-
sions. We used a greedy algorithm that clusters words based
on mutual synonymy as follows: Iterating over the sorted list,
at each word w, a new cluster cw is created containing w. From
the list of synonyms of w, all those words w0 are added to cw
whose synonym lists also contain w (i.e. mutual synonymy).
Finally, w0 is removed from the sorted list.
Final Selection
We found 230 single descriptors (i.e. clusters of size 1) and 175
synonym clusters (size > 1). For each such cluster, we selected
the most frequently used word with only one definition in our
set. With this approach, we aimed to maximise clarity of the
descriptors overall. For example, for the cluster aggressive,
ambitious, assertive, enterprising we selected assertive; while
aggressive and ambitious are used more frequently they also
appeared with other meanings in our overall set.
We conducted a final manual review and discussion to reduce
potentially remaining ambiguity and the number of descriptors
with low frequency of use (e.g. which had been selected for
2www.merriam-webster.com
3www.merriam-webster.com/thesaurus/cold
Online survey
Lab study
Text analysis
54
39
17
60
21 7
18
Figure 2. Overview of our final set of 349 descriptors, as collected with
each method.
clusters with overall low frequency). In this way, we arrived at
our final set of 349 adjectives (Figure 2).
EXPLORATORY FACTOR ANALYSIS
Research Design
We conducted an online survey to examine the structure of the
comprehensive set of English trait adjectives we collected us-
ing the multi-study approach presented in the previous sections.
The final descriptor set of 349 adjectives was administered to
participants recruited via Amazon MTurk to get a large and
diverse sample [7,13].
After giving informed consent, participants were asked to in-
dicate how often they had already interacted with each of the
speech-based conversational agents Siri, Alexa, and Google
Assistant. We used different agents to achieve a certain gen-
eralisability beyond a specific agent and limited ourselves to
the three most common ones because they were most likely
to be known by a large number of participants [57]. Inspired
by the approach to assess personality by peer ratings [47], par-
ticipants were asked to rate the speech-based conversational
agent for which they had indicated the highest interaction fre-
quency (minimum criterion was at least once). If they had
interacted equally frequently with two or three of them, they
were asked to select one of them for the following course of
the questionnaire. Afterwards, participants indicated the extent
to which each of the 349 adjectives presented in random order
applied to the respective selected speech-based conversational
agent on a four-point Likert scale ranging from “untypical” to
“rather untypical” to “rather typical” to “typical”. We used an
even response scale to avoid a “neither nor” category because
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Confrontational (1)
Dysfunctional (2) .42
Serviceable (3) -.22 -.21
Unstable (4) .64 .28 -.19
Approachable (5) .08 -.01 .36 .08
Social-Entertaining (6) .24 .21 .12 .17 .41
Social-Inclined (7) -.21 -.05 .43 -.19 .42 .29
Social-Assisting (8) .27 .24 .14 .22 .45 .35 .22
Self-Conscious (9) .34 .31 .11 .25 .28 .42 .17 .32
Artificial (10) .21 .25 -.03 .19 .01 -.04 -.09 .19 .01
Table 2. Correlations between the ten factors from our factor analysis.
psychometric research has shown that this is often understood
differently by participants and thus leads to problems [27].
Finally, participants provided demographic information.
On average, participants took 17 minutes for the online survey
and were compensated with $4.10 [34]. To ensure data quality,
we selected MTurk workers only if they met certain require-
ments regarding their previous work results (80% accepted
work performance in previous studies, at least 1,000 approved
work performances), if they were located in the US and indi-
cated to speak English at least well. Following related work [8]
we additionally used multiple attention checks throughout the
survey. We excluded participants’ data for our final analysis
if they had missed more than 25% of the attention tests or
their survey time was less than 8 minutes, which we set as
the minimum time for serious processing of our questionnaire
according to our own preliminary tests.
Participants
N = 744 participants (45.7% female, 53.5% male, 0.8% said
other or preferred not to say) completed the survey and ful-
filled our attention/time requirements described above. The
mean age was 36.7 (range 19-72 years). 28.6% indicated to
have graduated high school or have a diploma, 17.9% held an
associated degree, and 42.2% had a bachelor’s degree. The
remaining 11.3% had lower or higher educational degrees.
26.1% of the participants rated Siri, 32.9% rated Alexa, and
41.0% rated Google Assistant.
Data Analysis
We investigated the descriptor set’s underlying structure with
an exploratory factor analysis based on the correlation matrix
of all 349 descriptors. To determine the appropriate number of
factors we used the empirical Kaiser criterion which has been
found to perform well in research settings such as ours [10].
We used the R package psych [63] (R version 3.6.1).
The empirical Kaiser criterion proposed a ten-factorial solu-
tion. We used an obliquely (oblimin) rotated principle axis
analysis for factor extraction. The resulting ten factors ac-
counted for 49% of the variance. Table 2 shows their correla-
tions. Table 3 lists the factors with top 20 descriptors by factor
loadings and our interpreted factor labels. The complete factor
matrix can be found on the project website (cf. Conclusion
Section). Loadings ranged between -0.47 and 0.71 across all
factors. Using a loading value of 0.30 and high secondary
loadings (difference < 0.20) as criteria, 86 of the 349 items
could not (uniquely) be assigned to one of the ten factors.
We next describe each factor as a personality dimension for
speech-based conversational agents. We do not claim that
ours is the only possible interpretation; readers are invited to
develop their own understanding (e.g. via the top descriptors
in Table 3). To foster interpretation and discussion, we also
sketch ideas and scenarios in which we would expect an agent
to score highly on each dimension.
Confrontational
This dimension is described by negative terms that put the
agent into an actively negative stance, such as abusive, com-
bative, offensive, stingy, encroaching, manipulative, explosive,
or vindictive. Overall, we thus interpret this dimension as
capturing a confrontational aspect.
For example, a voice assistant scoring high on this dimension
might not always readily agree with the user or perform tasks
according to the user’s wishes. In addition, its feedback might
not strike a friendly tone in such situations.
Dysfunctional
This dimension is also described by negative terms, yet puts
the agent into a passive negative stance. The words signal
confusion and inactivity, such as lazy, irritated, fearful, unman-
ageable, ignorant, dead, inoperable, or forgetful. This inability
to function properly is both present on a more emotional/social
level (e.g. fearful, listless, conceited, stubborn, crazy) as well
as on a practical/functional one (e.g. inoperable, unmanage-
able, forgetful, dead). Since both these levels are meanings of
the word dysfunctional4 we chose this as a label here.
For example, an agent scoring high on this dimension might
not react to user input or not give (enough) feedback. It seems
likely that voice agents are perceived as highly dysfunctional
if their functionality as an assistant is severely hindered, for
instance, by software bugs (e.g. resetting mid conversation) or
hardware issues (e.g. broken microphone, loss of power).
Serviceable
This dimension is described by positive terms, which mostly
relate to cognitive functioning, such as informative, functional,
capable, accurate, knowledgeable, or thorough. In addition,
this dimension also considers adequate communication and
role-fulfillment as an assistant, such as convenient, responsive,
useful, user-friendly, interactive, communicative, productive,
and helpful. Overall, we thus interpret this dimension as cap-
turing functionality and usability of an assistant, which we
summarise as serviceable.
For example, an assistant scoring high here is likely to react
promptly, provides adequate feedback, and performs tasks in
a helpful and reliable way. It seems likely that most creators
of voice assistants want to present their product as highly
serviceable, for example, in advertisements.
Unstable
This dimension is described by negative terms, which overall
signal aspects of instability, rather than active confrontation
or passive inability to function. For example, this includes
terms such as nervous, anxious, or temperamental. Besides
4www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/dysfunctional
Factor / Label Top 20 descriptors (by factor loadings)
1 Confrontational abusive (.71), negligent (.70), deceitful (.69), cruel (.68), distrustful (.67), combative (.65), offensive (.65), incomprehensible (.64),
stingy (.62), messy (.60), encroaching (.59), scornful (.58), dubious (.58), irritable (.58), manipulative (.58), explosive (.56),
clumsy (.55), condescending (.54), clunky (.54), vindictive (.53)
2 Dysfunctional reckless (.71), lazy (.71), irritated (.70), fearful (.69), bitter (.65), moody (.65), crazy (.63), unmanageable (.62), prejudiced (.61),
treacherous (.61), ignorant (.59), conceited (.59), dead (.58), inoperable (.57), forgetful (.57), bad-tempered (.55), impetuous (.55),
listless (.52), stubborn (.51), egocentric (.50)
3 Serviceable informative (.56), functional (.56), capable (.56), accurate (.55), knowledgeable (.55), convenient (.54), thorough (.52),
responsive (.52), productive (.52), consistent (.50), useful (.50), user-friendly (.50), interactive (.50), adaptive (.50), helpful (.50),
communicative (.49), organized (.49), dependable (.48), intelligent (.47), comprehensive (.47)
4 Unstable nervous (.56), depressive (.54), rude (.54), bigoted (.52), grumpy (.51), jealous (.49), forceful (.49), anxious (.48), gruff (.47),
easy-to-use (-.47), frosty (.47), fretful (.45), tempestuous (.45), dangerous (.45), sloppy (.45), faultfinding (.45), dumb (.45),
troublesome (.43), rambunctious (.41), temperamental (.41)
5 Approachable peaceful (.64), easy-going (.62), gentle (.61), relaxed (.61), fair (.57), clear-minded (.56), respectful (.53), calm (.53), humble (.51),
respectable (.48), casual (.48), courteous (.47), sincere (.46), understanding (.44), ethical (.44), loyal (.43), open-minded (.43),
principled (.42), simplistic (.42), determined (.39)
6 Social-Entertaining humorous (.69), playful (.57), funny (.66), joyful (.52), charming (.51), entertaining (.51), cheerful (.50), merry (.49),
happy-go-lucky (.49), cheeky (.48), expressive (.45), chatty (.45), affectionate (.45), happy (.45), excited (.44), enthusiastic (.44),
social (.42), adorable (.41), warm (.39), encouraging (.38)
7 Social-Inclined agreeable (.51), willing (.46), likeable (.43), kind (.42), trustful (.41), decent (.40), modest (.40), flexible (.40), interested (.38),
realistic (.38), conversational (.38), friendly (.37), self-disciplined (.37), inquisitive (.35), patient (.34), soothing (.32),
endeavored (.32)
8 Social-Assisting pragmatic (.61), fastidious (.58), scrupulous (.57), genial (.54), diplomatic (.46), omniscient (.45), vigilant (.44), vigorous (.44),
benevolent (.43), dignified (.43), amiable (.41), stoic (.38), conscientious (.36), discreet (.36), deliberate (.35), meticulous (.33),
lenient (.33), zestful (.32), foresighted (.32), restrained (.31)
9 Self-Conscious independant (.45), assertive (.45), competitive (.43), brave (.42), creative (.42), deep (.41), selective (.41), proud (.39), excitable (.39),
artistic (.37), ambitious (.37), introspective (.36), powerful (.35), individualistic (.35), self-indulgent (.35), insistent (.35),
extravagant (.34), crafty (.34), contemplative (.34), daring (.34)
10 Artificial synthetic (.50), robotic (.49), intrusive (.48), artificial (.47), odd (.45), invasive (.44), gimmicky (.44), abrupt (.43), superficial (.43),
monotonous (.43), fake (.42), simple-minded (.41), mechanic (.41), vague (.41), passionless (.40), digital (.39), electronic (.39),
monitoring (.39), annoying (.36), detached (.35)
Table 3. Overview of the factors obtained in our exploratory factor analysis, with top 20 descriptors (and their factor loadings). The factor labels
suggested here are based on the authors’ interpretation of all descriptors per factor with loadings of at least .3.
a level of emotional/social instability present in these terms,
there are others that hint more at unstable functionality in this
context, such as sloppy, faultfinding, dangerous, and negative
(i.e. absence of) ease-of-use.
An example for scoring high on this dimension might be a
prototype that does not always work as users expect, with
inconsistency being the main negative aspect.
Approachable
This encompasses positive terms which cast the assistant as
calm and welcoming, with words such as peaceful, easy-going,
gentle, relaxed, open-minded and understanding. It also hints
at an assistant that treats requests well – fair, clear-minded,
respectful, sincere, ethical, loyal, principled, and determined.
In contrast to the positive terms of Serviceable, these cover
not so much the utility of fulfilling tasks as rather the positive
social experience expected in asking the assistant to do so. We
thus summarise such an assistant character as approachable.
A voice assistant scoring high here is likely to navigate well
through conversations and gives appropriate feedback that
strikes a socially adequate tone, independent of whether the
user’s request can be practically fulfilled or not.
Social-Entertaining
This dimension captures humour in the light of positive social
behaviour and entertainment, with terms such as humorous,
playful, funny, joyful, charming, entertaining, cheerful, happy,
and encouraging.
Scoring high on this dimension likely means that a voice
assistant can communicate in a humorous and entertaining
way, or includes dedicated functionality for that (e.g. can tell
jokes and stories, play games, etc.).
Social-Inclined
In this dimension we find an agent’s characteristic of being
inclined to assist its users, with positive terms such as agree-
able, willing, interested, endeavored, flexible, conversational,
inquisitive, and patient. This is accompanied by terms that sig-
nal a positive tone when communicating this, such as friendly,
kind, decent, modest, and soothing.
For instance, a speech-based conversational agent scoring high
on this dimension is overall friendly and might actively signal
readiness (e.g. with a hardware light) or ask users if they would
like a more detailed response or if they have further requests.
Social-Assisting
This dimension captures social skills and attitudes that can
be expected from the role of a skilled assistant: It has terms
such as pragmatic, conscientious, diplomatic, vigilant, fore-
sighted, amiable, and discreet. It also includes terms that signal
accurate task fulfilment such as meticulous, scrupulous and
deliberate. In contrast to other dimensions, these relate more
to the attitude with which an assistant executes its tasks, rather
than its usable functioning (cf. Serviceable) or its welcoming
character (cf. Approachable).
A voice assistant scoring high here likely handles requests
well while otherwise staying in the background. It clearly
communicates that its role is to serve the user and might also
anticipate users’ wishes and adequate (re)actions.
Self-Conscious
This dimension encompasses terms that render a voice assis-
tant as an entity capable of independent thought: For example,
these terms include independent, competitive, creative, artis-
tic, deep, proud, ambitious, introspective, and contemplative.
While actual artificial self-consciousness might still be in the
realm of science-fiction for a long time, a voice assistant might
create such an illusion in some contexts. This dimension also
contains “magical” (albeit not in the top 20), which supports
such an interpretation.
Designing a speech-based conversational agent to score high
here likely requires implementing convincing responses in
conversation about opinions, impressions or feelings: In such
more abstract conversations the agent might then have room to
show shades of (seemingly) independent and creative thought.
Artificial
In this dimension we find terms that emphasise artificiality or
“thingness”: For instance, this covers words such as synthetic,
robotic, artificial, gimmicky, superficial, fake, electronic, and
mechanic. Other terms here hint at technological implications
of bringing such a “thing” into human social contexts, such as
intrusive, odd, abrupt, simple-minded, passionless, monitoring,
annoying, and detached.
A conversational agent might score high on this dimension if it
clearly presents itself as an object – either by communicating
this intentionally (e.g. to avoid overtrust) or via issues that
break the illusion of an actual being behind the voice.
DISCUSSION
Reflection on Personality Dimensions
Our multi-method collection of descriptors resulted in ten
personality dimensions for conversational agents, derived via
exploratory factor analysis on ratings of our descriptors by
744 people (see Table 3). Reflecting on these dimensions, it is
interesting to note that the majority of dimensions indicates
either desirable or non-desirable characteristics. This suggests
that the agent’s ability to fulfill users’ expectations of natural
conversations is of crucial importance for users’ perception.
Comparing our ten dimensions to the Big Five model for hu-
man personality, we find that particularly adjectives from the
dimension agreeableness can be found in several of our di-
mensions, such as Approachable, Social-Inclined, and Social-
Assisting. Since we focused our work on voice assistants,
agreeableness seems to play a key role distributed over several
dimensions.
The dimension Unstable might be associated with the Big Five
dimension neuroticism, which is also called emotional stability.
Interestingly, this dimension does not only comprise human
characteristics of instability, e.g. nervous or depressive but
also technical characteristics such as inoperable or absence of
easy-to-use. Similarly, the dimension serviceable encompasses
human characteristics, e.g. knowledgeable, thorough, which
correspond with the Big Five dimension conscientiousness –
yet also technical terms such as useful or responsive.
This contrast of functional and social descriptors appears to
be a pattern which can be found within the majority of dimen-
sions: For example, also the dimension Dysfunctional includes
descriptors on a social and emotional level (reckless, moody,
crazy) combined with others that describe the technical func-
tionality or role of an assistant (e.g., inoperable, forgetful). The
dichotomy of functional and social has also been observed in
previous work on how users describe their everyday conversa-
tions with voice assistants [19,58].
Looking ahead, a different structure might emerge with a
greater variety of speech-based conversational agents: For ex-
ample, while current voice agents predominantly have roles as
assistants (which were the subject of our investigation), future
agents might fulfill other roles which in turn may impact on
their perceived personality and its description. Moreover, the
interaction with conversational agents does not really resemble
human conversation at the current technological stage, as is
underlined by the findings from the interaction experiment
(frequent use of descriptors such as as inhuman, impersonal,
or unpleasant). However, it is likely that with technological
improvements and a more natural conversation in the near
future, users might perceive agent personality differently.
Finally, two dimensions emerged that appear as independent
of an assistant role: Both Self-Conscious and Artificial seem
to describe a speech-based conversational agent’s similarity
to humans. On the one hand, self-consciousness represents a
dimension which current conversational agents cannot tech-
nically fulfil, yet the impression of for example creativity or
independence can impact on the perceived agent personality. In
contrast, Nass and Brave [53] discussed whether speech-based
conversational agents should be similar to humans. Hence,
an agent could appear as self-conscious in its conversation
content (e.g. offering opinions) but still highly artificial, e.g.
by using a clearly synthesised voice, to inform the user that
s/he is communicating with a machine. Doyle et al. [25] em-
phasised that users conceptualise voice assistants’ humanness
in a multidimensional way. According to their analysis, low
interpersonal connection and poor vocal qualities can result
in perceiving an agent as artificial, synthetic or robotic but
also several of our other dimensions, e.g. humour or kind of
knowledge, contribute to the overall perception of humanness.
Reflection on Methodology and Implications for Research
The descriptor sets collected in our three methods show only
small overlaps (see Figure 2): Only 18 descriptors in the fi-
nal set were named in all three methods. On the one hand,
this could indicate that more data is necessary to derive a
more generalisable and robust set. Hence, other approaches
or replications are useful and needed, e.g. to evaluate if de-
scriptors “satuate”. On the other hand, our results show that
a combination of multiple methods is beneficial to cover a
comprehensive variety of descriptors in different use cases.
We do not regard our resulting set as a “solution” but rather
as a starting point for future work: For comparison, many
researchers have been involved in the collection process for
human personality indicators over decades [21,38]. A large
proportion of the variance of people’s answers (51%) was not
explained by our dimensions. This error variance is compa-
rable to results known from human big five models [28] and
should be addressed in future work. We would also like to
point out that the formalisation of a measurement model for
agent personality goes beyond the scope of this work. We
outline key opportunities for such future work here:
Users’ purpose to interact with speech-based conversational
agents (task vs social conversation use) may influence per-
ception of personality. Since personality is defined as a stable
construct across contexts [48], we started out with a general
case to best reflect this definition of personality. In the lab
we presented different use cases (task and social). Overall, by
combining different methods and including implicit user data
(reviews), we collected data from a variety of use cases. Future
work should address specific and further use cases.
We focused on speech-based conversational agents. Future
work could investigate whether our descriptors can also ade-
quately describe the personality of other agents (e.g., robots,
chatbots). To investigate goodness of fit, future work could
conduct a confirmatory factor analysis using our descriptors
for rating these and other agents. In addition, 25% of our de-
scriptors could not be clearly assigned to one of dimensions.
These items in particular deserve attention in future work.
We also observed correlations between our dimensions: For
example, Confrontational, Dysfunctional, and Unstable are
considerably correlated. These all seem to describe negative
aspects of the conversational agent’s personality. Similarly,
we found a group of dimensions with positive connotations
(e.g., Social-Entertaining, Social-Inclined, Social-Assisting).
This could indicate that not only personality traits per se play
an important role in assessing the personality of agents, but
also their connotation and functional or experience-based eval-
uation in the user’s view. We encourage future research to
investigate these aspects separately and take them into account
when modelling. For example, it could be investigated if a
hierarchical structure of dimensions can be found.
We used English terms (and in the lab study terms translated
from German to English by two researchers). Future work
should investigate other languages and cultural backgrounds,
since the approach is language-based and different cultures
likely perceive agents’ personalities differently [58].
Implications for Practitioners
An important next step for HCI practice is to derive solution
principles for effectively implementing agent personality. Prac-
titioners usually have specific characteristics in mind when
designing agent personality. Our descriptors can be used as a
communication tool to make these characteristics explicit and
to discuss the desired personality of a new agent in a system-
atic way. This seems particularly interesting for collaborations,
when multiple conversation designers write dialogues individ-
ually, to facilitate consistency and a mutual understanding of
an agent personality [39].
Related work on the similarity attraction paradigm [14] pro-
posed to adapt agent personality to the user [4,11,41]. Agent
personality might also be designed with regard to user groups
and application context. The found dimensions support such
tasks since they make explicit 1) which aspects of personality
can be varied (e.g. to achieve a goal such as “neutral, prag-
matic helper”), yet also 2) which ones have to be considered as
well (e.g. Dysfunctional highlights considering that personality
is also present in how an assistant communicates failures).
CONCLUSION
We presented the first systematic analysis of personality de-
scriptors and dimensions for speech-based conversational
agents, following the established psycholexical approach from
psychology. Our main contribution is a set of 349 agent per-
sonality descriptors, grouped into ten personality dimensions,
which serve as an initial step to developing a personality model
for speech-based conversational agents.
As a broader implication, the revealed dimensions do not
match the Big Five model. Our descriptors also include terms
not associated with human personality. This systematically
consolidates evidence from related work about people describ-
ing agent personality differently [70]. Our findings thus indi-
cate that the human Big Five model is not directly applicable
to speech-based conversational agents. Instead, the found per-
sonality dimensions also capture, for example, how artificial,
self-conscious, or serviceable the agent appears to its users.
Practically, the found dimensions and descriptors support re-
search and applications in systematically designing personality
of speech-based conversational agents. Conceptually, we set
foundations for future work: As in psychology, personality
models should be re-validated in further studies. Future work
could also investigate models for other virtual agents (e.g.
chatbots). Here, our descriptors, dimensions, and methodol-
ogy may serve as a useful starting point.
To support such future research and applications, our project
website hosts the lists of adjectives from the studies, the final
descriptor set, and further material from the factor analysis:
www.medien.ifi.lmu.de/personality-model
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project is funded by the Bavarian State Ministry of Sci-
ence and the Arts in the framework of the Centre Digitisa-
tion.Bavaria (ZD.B).
REFERENCES
[1] Gordon W. Allport and Henry S. Odbert. 1936.
Trait-names: A psycho-lexical study. Psychological
Monographs 47, 1 (1936), i–171. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0093360
[2] Norman H. Anderson. 1968. Likableness ratings of 555
personality-trait words. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 9, 3 (1968), 272–279. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0025907
[3] Elisabeth André, Martin Klesen, Patrick Gebhard, Steve
Allen, and Thomas Rist. 2000. Integrating models of
personality and emotions into lifelike characters. In
Affective interactions IWAI 1999. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, A. Paiva (Ed.). Vol. 1814. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 150–165. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/10720296_11
[4] Sean Andrist, Bilge Mutlu, and Adriana Tapus. 2015.
Look Like Me: Matching Robot Personality via Gaze to
Increase Motivation. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
3603–3612. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702592
[5] M Arendasy. 2009. BFSI: Big-Five Struktur-Inventar
(Test & Manual). (2009). Mödling: SCHUHFRIED
GmbH.
[6] Christoph Bartneck and Jun Hu. 2008. Exploring the
abuse of robots. Interaction Studies 9, 3 (2008),
415–433. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1075/is.9.3.04bar
[7] Tara S. Behrend, David J. Sharek, Adam W. Meade, and
Eric N. Wiebe. 2011. The viability of crowdsourcing for
survey research. Behavior Research Methods 43, 3
(2011), 800–813. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13428-011-0081-0
[8] Adam J. Berinsky, Michele F. Margolis, and Michael W.
Sances. 2014. Separating the shirkers from the workers?
Making sure respondents pay attention on
self-administered surveys. American Journal of Political
Science 58, 3 (2014), 739–753. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12081
[9] François Bouchet and Jean-Paul Sansonnet. 2012.
Intelligent agents with personality: From adjectives to
behavioral schemes. In Cognitively Informed Intelligent
Interfaces: Systems Design and Development. IGI
Global, Hershey, PA, USA, 177–200. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-1628-8.ch011
[10] Johan Braeken and Marcel A. L. M. van Assen. 2017.
An empirical Kaiser criterion. Psychological Methods
22, 3 (2017), 450–466. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/met0000074
[11] Michael Braun, Anja Mainz, Ronee Chadowitz, Bastian
Pfleging, and Florian Alt. 2019. At Your Service:
Designing Voice Assistant Personalities to Improve
Automotive User Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article
Paper 40, 11 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300270
[12] Markus Bühner. 2011. Einführung in die Test- und
Fragebogenkonstruktion. Pearson Education, Munich,
Germany.
[13] Michael Buhrmester, Tracy Kwang, and Samuel D.
Gosling. 2011. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new
source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data?
Perspectives on Psychological Science 6, 1 (2011), 3–5.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691610393980
[14] Donn Byrne. 1961. Interpersonal attraction and attitude
similarity. The Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 62, 3 (1961), 713–715. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0044721
[15] Angelo Cafaro, Hannes Högni Vilhjálmsson, and
Timothy Bickmore. 2016. First Impressions in
Human–Agent Virtual Encounters. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 23, 4, Article 24 (Aug. 2016),
40 pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2940325
[16] Angelo Cafaro, Hannes Högni Vilhjálmsson, Timothy
Bickmore, Dirk Heylen, Kamilla Rún Jóhannsdóttir, and
Gunnar Steinn Valgardsson. 2012. First Impressions:
Users’ Judgments of Virtual Agents’ Personality and
Interpersonal Attitude in First Encounters. In Intelligent
Virtual Agents. IVA 2012. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Yukiko Nakano, Michael Neff, Ana Paiva, and
Marilyn Walker (Eds.), Vol. 7502. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 67–80. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33197-8_7
[17] Raymond B. Cattell. 1947. Confirmation and
clarification of primary personality factors.
Psychometrika 12, 3 (1947), 197–220. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02289253
[18] Cindy K. Chung and James W. Pennebaker. 2008.
Revealing dimensions of thinking in open-ended
self-descriptions: An automated meaning extraction
method for natural language. Journal of Research in
Personality 42, 1 (2008), 96–132. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2007.04.006
[19] Leigh Clark, Nadia Pantidi, Orla Cooney, Philip Doyle,
Diego Garaialde, Justin Edwards, Brendan Spillane,
Emer Gilmartin, Christine Murad, Cosmin Munteanu,
Vincent Wade, and Benjamin R. Cowan. 2019. What
Makes a Good Conversation?: Challenges in Designing
Truly Conversational Agents. In Proceedings of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article
475, 12 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300705
[20] Paul T. Costa and Robert R. McCrae. 1992. Neo
Personality Inventory – Revised (NEO PI-R).
Psychological Assessment Resources, Odessa, FL, USA.
[21] Boele De Raad. 2000. The Big Five Personality Factors:
The psycholexical approach to personality. Hogrefe &
Huber Publishers, Gottingen, Germany.
[22] David DeVault, Ron Artstein, Grace Benn, Teresa Dey,
Ed Fast, Alesia Gainer, Kallirroi Georgila, Jon Gratch,
Arno Hartholt, Margaux Lhommet, and et al. 2014.
SimSensei Kiosk: A Virtual Human Interviewer for
Healthcare Decision Support. In Proceedings of the
2014 International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS ’14). International
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems, Richland, SC, 1061–1068.
[23] Colin G DeYoung. 2014. Openness/Intellect: A
dimension of personality reflecting cognitive
exploration. In APA Handbook of Personality and Social
Psychology: Personality Processes and Individual
Differences, M. Mikulincer, P.R. Shaver, M.L. Cooper,
and R.J. Larsen (Eds.). Vol. 4. American Psychological
Association, Washington, DC, USA, 369–399. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14343-017
[24] Ed Diener, Ed Sandvik, William Pavot, and Frank Fujita.
1992. Extraversion and subjective well-being in a US
national probability sample. Journal of Research in
Personality 26, 3 (1992), 205–215. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0092-6566(92)90039-7
[25] Philip R. Doyle, Justin Edwards, Odile Dumbleton,
Leigh Clark, and Benjamin R. Cowan. 2019. Mapping
Perceptions of Humanness in Intelligent Personal
Assistant Interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services
(MobileHCI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, Article 5, 12 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3338286.3340116
[26] Malin Eiband, Sarah Theres Völkel, Daniel Buschek,
Sophia Cook, and Heinrich Hussmann. 2019. When
People and Algorithms Meet: User-reported Problems in
Intelligent Everyday Applications. In Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces (IUI ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
96–106. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3301275.3302262
[27] Michael Eid and Katharina Schmidt. 2014. Testtheorie
und Testkonstruktion. Hogrefe Verlag, Gottingen,
Germany.
[28] Timo Gnambs. 2015. Facets of measurement error for
scores of the Big Five: Three reliability generalizations.
Personality and Individual Differences 84 (2015), 84 –
89. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2014.08.019 Theory and
Measurement in Personality and Individual Differences.
[29] Lewis R. Goldberg. 1981. Language and individual
differences: The search for universals in personality
lexicons. In Review of Personality and Social
Psychology, L. Wheeler (Ed.). Vol. 2. Sage Publications,
Beverly Hills, CA, USA, 141–166.
[30] Lewis R. Goldberg. 1982. From Ace to Zombie: Some
explorations in the language of personality. In Advances
in Personality Assessment, Charles D. Spielberger and
James N. Butcher (Eds.). Vol. 1. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ,
USA, 203–234.
[31] Lewis R. Goldberg. 1990. An alternative “description of
personality”: The Big-Five factor structure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 6 (1990),
1216–1229. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.59.6.1216
[32] Harrison G. Gough and Alfred B. Heilbrun. 1980. The
Adjective Checklist Manual: 1980 Edition. Consulting
Psychologists Press, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
[33] E. Guzman and W. Maalej. 2014. How Do Users Like
This Feature? A Fine Grained Sentiment Analysis of
App Reviews. In 2014 IEEE 22nd International
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). IEEE, New
York, NY, USA, 153–162. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/RE.2014.6912257
[34] Kotaro Hara, Abigail Adams, Kristy Milland, Saiph
Savage, Chris Callison-Burch, and Jeffrey P. Bigham.
2018. A Data-Driven Analysis of Workers’ Earnings on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. In Proceedings of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article
Paper 449, 14 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174023
[35] Katherine Isbister and Clifford Nass. 2000. Consistency
of personality in interactive characters: verbal cues,
non-verbal cues, and user characteristics. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 53, 2 (2000), 251 –
267. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.2000.0368
[36] Joshua J. Jackson, Dustin Wood, Tim Bogg, Kate E.
Walton, Peter D. Harms, and Brent W. Roberts. 2010.
What do conscientious people do? Development and
validation of the Behavioral Indicators of
Conscientiousness (BIC). Journal of Research in
Personality 44, 4 (2010), 501–511. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2010.06.005
[37] Lauri A. Jensen-Campbell and William G. Graziano.
2001. Agreeableness as a moderator of interpersonal
conflict. Journal of Personality 69, 2 (2001), 323–362.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-6494.00148
[38] Oliver P. John, Alois Angleitner, and Fritz Ostendorf.
1988. The lexical approach to personality: A historical
review of trait taxonomic research. European Journal of
Personality 2, 3 (1988), 171–203. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.2410020302
[39] Hankyung Kim, Dong Yoona Koh, Gaeunb Lee,
Jung-Mi Park, and Youn-kyung Lim. 2019. Developing
a Design Guide for Consistent Manifestation of
Conversational Agent Personalities. In IASDR
Conference. Manchester Metropolitan University,
Manchester, UK, 1–17.
[40] B. Kinsella and A. Mutchler. 2018. U.S. Smart Speaker
Consumer Adoption Report 2019. (2018). Retrieved on
September 12, 2019 from https://voicebot.ai/smart-
speaker-consumer-adoption-report-2019/.
[41] Brigitte Krenn, Birgit Endrass, Felix Kistler, and
Elisabeth André. 2014. Effects of Language Variety on
Personality Perception in Embodied Conversational
Agents. In Human-Computer Interaction. Advanced
Interaction Modalities and Techniques. HCI 2014.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Masaaki Kurosu
(Ed.), Vol. 8511. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 429–439. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07230-2_41
[42] Vivek Kulkarni, Margaret L. Kern, David Stillwell,
Michal Kosinski, Sandra Matz, Lyle Ungar, Steven
Skiena, and H. Andrew Schwartz. 2018. Latent human
traits in the language of social media: An
open-vocabulary approach. PLOS ONE 13, 11 (2018),
e0201703. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0201703
[43] Walid Maalej, Zijad Kurtanović, Hadeer Nabil, and
Christoph Stanik. 2016. On the Automatic Classification
of App Reviews. Requirements Engineering 21, 3
(2016), 311–331. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00766-016-0251-9
[44] Gerald Matthews, Ian J. Deary, and Martha C.
Whiteman. 2003. Personality Traits. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 602 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511812736
[45] Robert R. McCrae. 2009. The Five-Factor Model of
personality traits: consensus and controversy. In The
Cambridge Handbook of Personality Psychology,
Philip J. Corr and Gerald Matthews (Eds.). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 148–161. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511596544.012
[46] Robert R. McCrae and Paul T. Costa. 1985. Updating
Norman’s adequacy taxonomy: Intelligence and
personality dimensions in natural language and in
questionnaires. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 49, 3 (1985), 710–721. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.49.3.710
[47] Robert R. McCrae and Paul T. Costa. 1987. Validation
of the five-factor model of personality across
instruments and observers. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 52, 1 (1987), 81–90. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.52.1.81
[48] Robert R. McCrae and Paul T. Costa. 2008. A five-factor
theory of personality. In Handbook of Personality:
Theory and Research, O.P. John, R.W. Robins, and L.A.
Pervin (Eds.). Vol. 3. The Guilford Press, New York, NY,
USA, 159–181.
[49] Robert R. McCrae and Oliver P. John. 1992. An
introduction to the five-factor model and its applications.
Journal of Personality 60, 2 (1992), 175–215. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1992.tb00970.x
[50] J. Murray McNiel and William Fleeson. 2006. The
causal effects of extraversion on positive affect and
neuroticism on negative affect: Manipulating state
extraversion and state neuroticism in an experimental
approach. Journal of Research in Personality 40, 5
(2006), 529–550. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2005.05.003
[51] Margaret McRorie, Ian Sneddon, Gary McKeown,
Elisabetta Bevacqua, Etienne de Sevin, and Catherine
Pelachaud. 2012. Evaluation of Four Designed Virtual
Agent Personalities. IEEE Transactions on Affective
Computing 3, 3 (2012), 311–322. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2011.38
[52] George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical Database
for English. Commun. ACM 38, 11 (1995), 39–41. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/219717.219748
[53] Clifford Ivar Nass and Scott Brave. 2005. Wired for
speech: How voice activates and advances the
human-computer relationship. MIT press, Cambridge,
MA, USA.
[54] Michael Neff, Nicholas Toothman, Robeson Bowmani,
Jean E. Fox Tree, and Marilyn A. Walker. 2011. Don’t
Scratch! Self-adaptors Reflect Emotional Stability. In
Intelligent Virtual Agents. IVA 2011. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Hannes Högni Vilhjálmsson, Stefan
Kopp, Stacy Marsella, and Kristinn R. Thórisson (Eds.),
Vol. 6895. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 398–411. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23974-8_43
[55] Warren T. Norman. 1963. Toward an adequate taxonomy
of personality attributes: Replicated factor structure in
peer nomination personality ratings. The Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology 66, 6 (1963), 574–583.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0040291
[56] Warren T. Norman. 1967. 2800 Personality trait
descriptors – Normative operating characteristics for a
university population. Technical Report ED 014 738.
Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
[57] Christi Olsen and Kelli Kemery. 2019. Voice report:
From answers to action: customer adoption of voice
technology and digital assistants. (2019). Retrieved on
September 1, 2019 from
https://advertiseonbing-blob.azureedge.net/blob/
bingads/media/insight/whitepapers/2019/04%20apr/
voice-report/bingads_2019_voicereport.pdf.
[58] Marta Garcia Perez, Sarita Saffon Lopez, and Hector
Donis. 2018. Voice Activated Virtual Assistants
Personality Perceptions and Desires: Comparing
Personality Evaluation Frameworks. In Proceedings of
the 32nd International BCS Human Computer
Interaction Conference (HCI ’18). BCS Learning &
Development Ltd., Swindon, GBR, Article Article 40,
10 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.14236/ewic/HCI2018.40
[59] Laura Pfeifer Vardoulakis, Lazlo Ring, Barbara Barry,
Candace L. Sidner, and Timothy Bickmore. 2012.
Designing Relational Agents as Long Term Social
Companions for Older Adults. In Intelligent Virtual
Agents. IVA 2012. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.,
Yukiko Nakano, Michael Neff, Ana Paiva, and Marilyn
Walker (Eds.), Vol. 7502. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
289–302. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33197-8_30
[60] Martin Porcheron, Joel E. Fischer, Stuart Reeves, and
Sarah Sharples. 2018. Voice Interfaces in Everyday Life.
In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 640, 12 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174214
[61] Anand S. Rao and Michael P. Georgeff. 1995. BDI
Agents: From Theory to Practice.. In Proceedings of the
First International Conference on Multiagent Systems
(ICMAS). AAAI, San Francisco, CA, USA, 312–319.
[62] Byron Reeves and Clifford Ivar Nass. 1996. The media
equation: How people treat computers, television, and
new media like real people and places. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
[63] William R. Revelle. 2018. psych: Procedures for
Psychological, Psychometric, and Personality Research.
(2018). https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=psych R
package version 1.8.12.
[64] Paola Rizzo, Manuela Veloso, Maria Miceli, and
Amedeo Cesta. 1997. Personality-driven social
behaviors in believable agents. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Fall Symposium on Socially Intelligent Agents.
AAAI, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 109–114.
[65] Klaus Rainer Scherer. 1979. Personality markers in
speech. In Social Markers in Speech, Klaur Rainer
Scherer and Howard Giles (Eds.). Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
[66] Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, Andrew Lin, Sara Jewett,
and Lance Nathan. 2018. LuminosoInsight/wordfreq:
v2.2. (Oct. 2018). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1443582
[67] Adriana Tapus and Maja J Mataric. 2008. Socially
Assistive Robots: The Link between Personality,
Empathy, Physiological Signals, and Task Performance..
In AAAI Spring Symposium: Emotion, personality, and
social behavior. AAAI, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 133–140.
[68] James Vlahos. 2019. Talk to Me: How Voice Computing
Will Transform the Way We Live, Work, and Think.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Boston, MA, USA.
[69] Chris Welch. 2018. Google just gave a stunning demo of
Assistant making an actual phone call. (2018). Retrieved
on September 19, 2019 from
https://www.theverge.com/2018/5/8/17332070/google-
assistant-makes-phone-call-demo-duplex-io-2018.
[70] Michelle X. Zhou, Gloria Mark, Jingyi Li, and Huahai
Yang. 2019. Trusting Virtual Agents: The Effect of
Personality. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 9, 2-3,
Article 10 (March 2019), 36 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3232077
[71] Matthias Ziegler and Markus Buehner. 2009. Modeling
Socially Desirable Responding and Its Effects.
Educational and Psychological Measurement 69, 4
(2009), 548–565. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013164408324469
