A Cybersecurity Guide for Using Fitness Devices
Maria Bada1 2[0000-0003-0741-5199]
and Basie von Solms2 [0000-0003-3586-6632]
1
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0FD, UK
maria.bada@cl.cam.ac.uk
2
University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park, Johannesburg, South Africa
basievs@uj.ac.za
Abstract. The popularity of wearable devices is growing exponentially, with
consumers using these for a variety of services. Fitness devices are currently
offering new services such as shopping or buying train tickets using contactless
payment. In addition, fitness devices are collecting a number of personal
information such as body temperature, pulse rate, food habits and body weight,
steps-distance travelled, calories burned and sleep stage. Although these devices
can offer convenience to consumers, more and more reports are warning of the
cybersecurity risks of such devices, and the possibilities for such devices to be
hacked and used as springboards to other systems. Due to their wireless
transmissions, these devices can potentially be vulnerable to a malicious attack
allowing the data collected to be exposed. The vulnerabilities of these devices
stem from lack of authentication, disadvantages of Bluetooth connections,
location tracking as well as third party vulnerabilities. Guidelines do exist for
securing such devices, but most of such guidance is directed towards device
manufacturers or IoT providers, while consumers are often unaware of potential
risks. The aim of this paper is to provide cybersecurity guidelines for users in
order to take measures to avoid risks when using fitness devices.
Keywords: Wearable devices, Cybersecurity, Risk, Awareness, IoTs, Privacy.
1 Introduction
Currently there is a lot of discussion around the Internet of Things (IoTs) and the new
types of threats emerging from new technologies [1] [2]. IoTs create great opportunities
for everyone but also create new tools for citizens and criminals.
Wearable devices are becoming very popular especially in healthcare and fitness.
Such devices could be health monitors, fitness bands or smartwatches. In addition, the
worldwide sales of these devices have been growing with 110 million units in 2018 [3].
Wearable devices are quite popular, since they merge the physical and digital world.
A recent study [4] identified that smartphone users tend to also own wearables.
Moreover, a large percentage of users would use wearables in the next five years not
only to track health related information, but also for everyday actions such as unlocking
a door, making financial transactions or authenticating their identity.
Some devices such as Fitbits are currently offering new services such as making
transactions with contactless payment for example in order to do shopping or buy train
2
tickets. In order to use the device for such services consumers need to add their credit
or debit card to their Fitbit watch or tracker [5]. Fitbit Pay works with a number of Fitbit
smartwatches [6]. This function is also supported by the consumer’s bank fraud
protection services. In the UK, the device can be used for Transport for London (TfL)
transit system including buses, London Underground and trains and other services [5].
However, more and more reports are warning of the cybersecurity risks of such
devices, and the possibilities for such devices to be hacked. Guidelines do exist for
securing such devices, but most of such guidance is directed towards device
manufacturers, IoT providers and more. One good example is the Code of Practice for
consumer IoT security by the UK Department of Culture Media and Sport [7]. Very
little, if any such guidance does exist for the real end user, the ordinary citizen, who
makes use of fitness devices and other smart home devices.
The purpose of this paper is to put the focus on the end users and emphasise on the
security risks of fitness devices. The focus of this research lies on fitness devices due
to their wide current usage and the direct or indirect risks they pose to users. Risks are
not only related to security but also to user privacy. In order to create a set of guidelines
for users around security and privacy issues, we reviewed current research following a
grounded theory approach.
In Section 2, we discuss the personal data collected by fitness devices while in
Section 3 we provide a description of the cybersecurity risks they are exposed to. In
Section 4 we discuss the cybersecurity awareness needs of users of wearable devices
and in Section 5 we present a number of guidelines for users and manufacturers in order
to lower their exposure to risks. Finally, Section 6 discusses the findings and Section 7
concludes this paper.
2 Personal Data Collection by Fitness Devices
Different models of wearable devices are offered to consumers from different
companies. For example, Fitbits, Apple Watches and Samsung Galaxy Watches are
some of the products available today. These devices have a particular function;
however, they also collect personal data from users [8]. We will review Fitbit as an
example, however other products collect similar information. For example, Fitbit
smartwatches collect information that can be considered private and potentially
dangerous in the wrong hands. According to Fitbit’s Legal Policy, Fitbit receive or
collect three categories of information from user devices [9]:
• Physical Data: data such as body temperature, pulse rate, food habits and body
weight, steps-distance travelled, calories burned, sleep stage, and active
minute. These data are synchronised to devices that transfer information to
Fitbit servers.
• Location Data: Fitbits receive information regarding location through GPS
signals or Wi-Fi access points.
• Usage Data: Fitbits collect information about a user’s interaction with
services, such as when a user views or searches content or installs software.
3
Users typically transmit this data using a wireless connection, such as a Bluetooth,
Wi-Fi or a cellular connection. For example, devices transfer the data they collect
through a smartphone using Wi-Fi or Bluetooth connections. The data received are then
stored or transmitted to a cloud server [10].
Fitbit introduced a series of technology for workout tracking such as PurePulse,
SmartTrack and Sleep Tracking a technology that automatically recognizes users’
exercises and record the data through a smartphone [11].
3 Risks Arising from Fitness Devices
Although fitness devices have been developed and used for a number of years, it seems
that developers still do not focus on the security of these devices. As mentioned above,
these devices collect information related to the health and wellness of consumers, thus
collecting a big amount of data. As a result, device manufacturers are often putting
consumer data at risk of exposure due to device related vulnerabilities.
The main types of security incidents related to Fitbits are based on [9]:
1. Lack of Authentication and Physical Security Control: Currently, Fitbit
smartwatches do not have a built-in security mechanism. Without
authentication, Fitbits pose a threat to an individual’s personal information.
Due to the lack of authentication these devices are placed as highly vulnerable,
since a hacker can gain access to a company’s network through these for
potential exploitation.
2. Disadvantages of Bluetooth Connections: Since the main connectivity method
for a Fitbit is Bluetooth, it inherits the same vulnerabilities that most Bluetooth
devices have during times of communication. Fitbits are susceptible to various
threats such as message modification, denial of service (DDoS), and
eavesdropping attacks.
3. Location/Tracking and Biometric Leakage: A Fitbit can acquire information
regarding a user’s location, either through the built-in GPS, or by pairing with
a smartphone’s GPS. Location tracking can raise serious security concerns for
individuals and organisations.
4. Third-Party Related Attacks: In 2015, a big number of online accounts of
Fitbit users were attacked by hackers. The hackers used details such as email
addresses and passwords from third-party websites to log in to Fitbit accounts.
They then used the details to file false claims for replacement orders. Also,
they managed to gain access to customer personal data such as GPS history
[12].
As mentioned above, wearable devices allow the collection of personal data through
device sensors initially while the data are then shared through a smartphone [13]. Due
to their wireless transmissions, these devices can potentially have vulnerabilities to a
malicious attack allowing the data to be exposed. Because a wearable, like a Fitbit
exercise watch, is mostly connected and synchronised with the user’s smart phone or
laptop, infecting the Fitbit with malware will automatically infect the user’s smart
phone when fitness data is uploaded. Once the phone is infected, all possible
4
compromises can happen, and the infection can be then propagated to other trackers
[14].
For example, hackers could wirelessly upload malware onto a Fitbit by using
Bluetooth. Although a hacker would need to be near the targeted Fitbit in order to infect
it, the Bluetooth connection might take place in any public area such as in a park or
coffee shop. The process would take only 10 seconds, and the user would not notice
anything wrong with their Fitbit at that point. Once the user connects the
infected wearable device to a PC or laptop, the malware can spread to the personal
computer or the business computers and even the entire network [15].
In order for information to be transmitted between two devices, one device must
establish a central role in the connection with Bluetooth and the second device must
play a peripheral role [11]. For example, in the case of a pair of Bluetooth Fitbit
SmartTrack to iPhone, the iPhone would play the role of the central device and Fitbit
SmartTrack would be the peripheral device that indicates available connection where
the signals contain the IP address of a mobile device and a payload containing data
about the connection [11].
Also, these devices include tools such as accelerometers and gyroscopes, which
provide useful data with which someone can identify fine motor task movement [16],
and orientation [17]. If the potential risks are considered a step further, then it is clear
that such devices can be used for more sophisticated cyber-attacks by capturing the
gentle movements and position changes of the wrist while writing.
Such sophisticated tools can be used to recognise the password typed by a user or
the security number of an employee when they type it in real time. Using machine
learning, researchers were able to detect the wrist movement while writing digits and
were able to construct a robust machine learning model predicting perfect real-time
performance [18].
Other security related risks are arising from the payment facilities, through the credit
card information which can be stored on the user’s device. As mentioned above, some
devices such as Fitbit are currently offering the possibility to connect the device with a
credit card and use it as an electronic wallet. The main reference around security of this
functionality is around fraud and the responsibility of the consumer’s bank to provide
support [5].
4 Cybersecurity Awareness of Users
Although users might expect a USB stick to be a way of transmitting malware or
become a target for hackers, most users do not expect their fitness trackers to be a target
[19]. However, these little devices are the perfect delivery system for malware. People
perceive wearable devices as a new mean to interact with their social groups and not as
a potential threat to their medical information. In addition, younger people are more
likely to share their wearable device's data online [20]. It is often the case that users are
willing to sacrifice security and privacy because of the convenience a smart device
provides [21].
5
Users often lack awareness about the information security and privacy related issues
of using wearable devices [3]. In addition, users might not know what types of data are
being collected or being stored or transmitted by their wearable devices. Moreover,
there is a general lack of awareness around encryption of data during transmission. It is
therefore, not a surprise that lack of awareness also leads to users not being aware of
the security policy for their wearable device or the security measures used to protect
their data. In addition, if users suspect an information security incident, they are not
aware where to report it.
This lack of awareness of users around privacy and the blind trust of users that their
data would be protected might complicate the accountability of service providers in the
case of a data breaches [22] [23] [3].
Additionally, there is the issue of ownership of the data [24]. Previous research
showed that only a small number of users backed up sensitive or critical data at a regular
basis or tested recovery [3]. Therefore, it is obvious that security and privacy
considerations of such delicate data collected by IoT devices are essential.
As technology developers push new wearable devices to the market and make these
devices sync with existing smartphones, malware creators are looking for new avenues
of attack [25]. Criminals can use the data to organise cyber-attacks based on identity
theft, impersonation by creating a fake user profile or by using more targeted phishing
attacks. Voice-recognition technology might also facilitate such cyber-attacks through
the different tools already being used in vishing.
It is important to notice that wearable devices are the first category of information
technology (IT) devices where there is not only danger due to the exposure of consumer
data, but also the real potential to cause physical harm to wearers. Therefore, it is
essential that all users of fitness devices are informed about the potential risks stemming
from using them.
5 Cybersecurity Guidelines for Users and Manufacturers
Policy makers, but also businesses, NGOs or users, face enormous challenges since
current policies are often inadequate [26]. Currently emerging technologies require a
new thinking around privacy, freedom of expression, intellectual property protection
and national security.
However, policies are not the only necessary measure that needs to be taken. It is
important to establish a cybersecurity ecosystem in all sectors and focus more on the
attitudes, beliefs and practices of end-users. Dutton [27] describes a cybersecurity
mindset as “a pattern of attitudes, beliefs and values that motivate individuals to
continually act in ways to secure themselves and their network of users”.
Consumers need to take some basic steps in order to ensure that their personal
information is not exposed to malicious intent. Some of the simplest steps is to research
the security features of the intended device and read relevant reviews of the product
[28].
However, there is a number of steps users and manufacturers can take in order to
lower their exposure to risks. These are summarized in Table 1.
6
5.1 Cybersecurity Guidelines for Users
A number of guidelines which users can follow to ensure a safe use of wearable devices
are presented below:
Adjusting the Settings. To prevent malware infection, it is important that all personal
and business devices are always protected from outside threats. Many devices, such as
smartphones or laptops, allow to secure their Bluetooth connection with a password to
prevent unauthorized access. This way, Fitbit will only connect to the customer’s
phone.
Users need to always exercise caution when plugging any device into a
computer. Using an antivirus program to scan any connected device for viruses and
malware and determining the settings to limit the personal data captured by the device
are important steps towards security. Disabling the permission in capturing data such
as sleep patterns and capture only the data a user really needs is also a good measure.
Education on Risks. A significantly stronger security posture can be achieved simply
by educating Fitbit users about keeping their devices and software current with the
latest security updates, and the best choice settings relevant to security, such as data
sharing, location and Bluetooth. In particular, users should keep Bluetooth in “off”
mode when not intentionally being used to avoid known hacks discussed earlier [9].
Education on Good Practices. One of the reasons for the security breaches mentioned
in Section 3 is the fact that the service doesn’t require the use of strong passwords,
leading to higher risk of users repeating the same email-password combination on
numerous websites. Weak passwords such as ‘123456’ are still being used by many
Fitbit users [12]. It is therefore essential for users to be aware of good practices around
building strong passwords for all their accounts.
Consumer-Friendly Privacy Practices. Many of the potential risks described above
could be partially resolved by providing consumers with much greater control regarding
their data and how they choose to use them. For example, users could have the choice
to opt out of targeted advertising, having the right to be forgotten regarding all health
related and non-health data. In addition, consumers could be asked regularly to update
their privacy-friendly defaults [29].
It is therefore essential also for users of wearable devices to be educated about
potential privacy and information security related risks to which they are exposed when
using these devices.
7
Table 1. Warnings and instructions for using wearable devices
Functionalities Warning Instructions
Electronic Wallet Risks of fraud
• Encrypt critical data elements such as ID,
passwords and PIN.
Data collected
The device can be
vulnerable to risks via the
Bluetooth or Wifi
connection used
• Use an antivirus program to scan any
connected device for viruses and malware
and determine the settings to limit the
personal data captured by the device.
• Disable the permission in capturing data
such as sleep patterns and capture only the
data you really need.
• Keep Bluetooth in “off” mode when not
intentionally being used.
Testing
The device is collecting
data such as body
temperature, pulse rate,
food habits and body
weight, steps-distance
travelled, calories burned
and sleep stage. These
data are synchronized to
devices that transfer
information to Fitbit
servers.
• Use a VPN service on all your devices to
ensure your privacy.
• Think about the purpose and the
environment you might want to wear your
fitness tracker.
• Read the company’s privacy policy and
ensure that reasonable steps are taken to
protect it.
• Conduct research on data breaches of a
specific device or company and prevention
measures taken in the occasion of a future
attack.
Synchronising
with phone or
laptop
After the user connects
a wearable which has
been infected with
malware to a PC or
laptop, the malware can
spread to via the PC or
laptop and even infect the
entire network.
• Keep your devices and software current
with the latest security updates, and the best
choice settings relevant to security, such as
data sharing, location and Bluetooth.
Connecting the
device to email
Using email addresses
and passwords from
third-party websites to
log in to Fitbit accounts is
risky.
• Use strong passwords and avoid email-
password combination repetitions on
multiple sites.
8
5.2 Cybersecurity Guidelines for Manufacturers
A number of guidelines which manufacturers can follow to ensure secure wearable
devices are presented below:
Create Policies and Standards. Rigorous quality testing should be a standard practice
followed by all IoT device manufacturers. Implementing security techniques like strong
password protection for security agnostic IoT devices could incur memory and cost
overheads, although these practices are essential in securing the network [30].
Organisations can deter some cyber threats by creating appropriate use policies and user
agreements for Fitbits and other wearables.
In addition, manufacturers can establish a functionality of the devices informing the
user of potential risks to their personal information, when they log into the device
application for the first time. Only after the user accepts the warning advice they can
log into the device. This way manufacturers can promote general awareness for
consumers and support a cybersecurity mind-set for users. By understanding how
hackers think, users can take measures to mitigate the potential risks of these devices.
6 Discussion
As described above, new IoT devices such as fitness wearable devices, place new
threats for users. Lack of security considerations or privacy and data protection
considerations around these devices pose serious risks initially to the user of the device
with potential cascading effects of a security incident to a large number of devices of
the user and others connected to that user. While the data security of fitness wearable
devices is questionable [31], a research gap is recognised around security and privacy
by design considerations of IoT [32].
Despite these threats, manufacturers of IoT devices still do not provide consumers
with enough information about the security features of the devices before they purchase
the product. In addition, little information on user behaviour and good practise while
using these devices is provided [33].
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [34] provides users with the rights
to their personal data that is held by firms, specifically around the right to be informed
of how the data will be used or processed, the right of erasure of data or the right to
object the data being collected. Consumers should be given easy to understand security
information in order to make correct choices when they shop smart devices.
Additionally, users should be given enough information regarding their rights around
protecting their personal data after purchasing these devices. However, it would still
depend on the consumer and the purchase decision they make based on the level of
awareness and knowledge regarding cybersecurity.
Currently, there is lack of awareness of these vulnerabilities by device owners [35],
and this is posing difficulties in addressing the security challenges of IoTs [36].
Considering approaches to educate or protect users while imposing security has proved
ineffective [35]. Also, creating a culture of fear around potential threats is problematic.
9
Cybersecurity awareness raising initiatives are necessary in order to increase
baseline cybersecurity and develop the skills needed to ensure a safer cyberspace [37].
Users might not realise the risks associated with the use of smart devices [38], this is
why it is imperative for all users to gain a basic understanding of the potential harms
associated to their use.
The security of IoTs is complex and many stakeholders need to be involved,
including the user. There is almost no limit to the variety of devices that can be IoT
enabled via wireless connectivity. This is why it is imperative to adopt a proactive IoT-
centric security posture, focusing on education and awareness for users.
7 Conclusions
The current research has provided a review of the security and privacy related risks
related to the use of wearable devices. Users might lack knowledge and awareness
around these risks, therefore more efforts are needed from manufacturers of IoT devices
to provide consumers with information on user behaviour and good practise while using
these devices. Although the focus of this study has been fitness devices, in future work
further research will be conducted comparing the risks among different wearable
devices.
References
1. Radanliev, P., De Roure, D.C., Maple, C., Nurse, J.R., Nicolescu, R., Ani, U.: Cyber Risk
in IoT Systems. Preprints (2019).
2. Europol, Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment (IOCTA) (2019),
https://www.europol.europa.eu/activities-services/main-reports/internet-organised-crime-
threat-assessment-iocta-2019, last accessed 2020/1/15.
3. Cilliers, L.: Wearable devices in healthcare: Privacy and information security issues. Health
Information Management Journal 49(2-3), 150-156 (2020).
4. Poongodi, T., Krishnamurthi, Rajalakshmi, Indrakumari, R., Suresh, P., Balusamy,
Balamuruga: Wearable Devices and IoT: In A Handbook of Internet of Things in Biomedical
and Cyber Physical System. Editors, Balas, V.E., Solanki, Vijender Kumar, Kumar,
Raghvendra, Ahad, Md. Atiqur Rahman. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 245-
273 (2020).
5. Fitbit, Fitbit Pay, https://www.fitbit.com/global/be/technology/fitbit-pay, last accessed
2020/1/15.
6. Pocket-lint, What is Fitbit Pay, how does it work, and which banks support it?,
https://www.pocket-lint.com/fitness-trackers/news/fitbit/142115-what-is-fitbit-pay-how-
does-it-work-and-which-banks-support-it, last accessed 2020/1/15.
7. Department of Culture Media and Sport, Code of Practice for consumer IoT security,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-for-consumer-iot-
security/code-of-practice-for-consumer-iot-security, last accessed 2020/1/15.
8. Farnell, G., Barkley, J.: The effect of a wearable physical activity monitor (Fitbit One) on
physical activity behaviour in women: A pilot study. Journal of Human Sport and Exercise,
12(4), 1230-1237 (2017).
10
9. Blow, F., Hu Yen-Hung (Frank), Hoppa, M.A.: A Study on Vulnerabilities and Threats to
Wearable Devices. Journal of The Colloquium for Information Systems Security Education,
CISSE 7(1), (2020).
10. Kolamunna, H., Jagmohan, C., Hu, Y., Thilakarathna, K., Perino, D., Makaroff, D.,
Seneviratne, A.: Are Wearables Ready for Secure and Direct Internet Communication?
GetMobile: Mobile Computing and Communications, 21, 5-10 (2017).
11. Zhang, C., Shahriar, H., Riad A.B.M.K.: Security and Privacy Analysis of Wearable Health
Device. In: IEEE 44th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference
(COMPSAC), Madrid, Spain pp. 1767-1772 (2020).
12. Hackernoon, Million Fitbit Accounts Were Exposed by Cybercriminals,
https://hackernoon.com/2-million-fitbit-accounts-was-exposed-by-cybercriminals-
aa7u36pj, last accessed 2020/1/15.
13. Stuhr, S. A.: Wearable devices and their impact on the security of personal information.
Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses A&I. (2447022760),
https://ezp.lib.cam.ac.uk/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-
theses/wearable-devices-their-impact-on-security/docview/2447022760/se-
2?accountid=9851, last accessed 2020/1/15.
14. Helpnetsecurity, Fitbit trackers can easily be infected with malware, and spread it on,
https://www.helpnetsecurity.com/2015/10/22/fitbit-trackers-can-easily-be-infected-with-
malware-and-spread-it-on/, last accessed 2020/1/15.
15. Bay Computing, New Malware can infect your FitBit and spread to your computer,
https://baymcp.com/new-malware-can-infect-your-fitbit-and-spread-to-your-
computer/#:~:text=Infecting%20a%20Fitbit%20via%20Bluetooth,or%20any%20other%20
public%20area, last accessed 2020/1/15.
16. Ching, K., Mahinderjit Singh, M.: Wearable Technology Devices Security and Privacy
Vulnerability Analysis. International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications, 8, 19-
30 (2016).
17. Britt Cyr, W.H.: Retrieved from Security Analysis of Wearable Fitness Devices (Fitbit),
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Security-Analysis-of-Wearable-Fitness-Devices-(-
)-Cyr-Horn/f4abebef4e39791f358618294cd8d040d7024399, last accessed 2020/1/15.
18. Lambert, L., Wiere, S.: Digit Recognition From Wrist Movements and Security Concerns
with Smart Wrist Wearable IOT Devices. In: Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(2020).
19. Gizmodo, Hackers Can Wirelessly Upload Malware to a Fitbit in 10 Seconds,
https://gizmodo.com/hackers-can-wirelessly-upload-malware-to-a-fitbit-in-10-
1737880606, last accessed 2020/1/15.
20. Zanella, G., Guda, T.: Managing the gap between disruptive innovation and people's
perceptions: the case of wearable devices. International Journal of Technology Intelligence
and Planning (IJTIP), (12) 4, (2020).
21. Zeng, E., Roesner, F.: Understanding and improving security and privacy in multi-user smart
homes: a design exploration and in-home user study. In: 28th {USENIX} Security
Symposium ({USENIX} Security 19), pp. 159-176, (2019).
22. Anaya, LS., Alsadoon, A., Costadopoulos, N., et al.: Ethical implications of user perceptions
of wearable devices. Science and Engineering Ethics 24(1), 1–28 (2018).
23. Ogundele, O., Isabirye, N., Cilliers, L.: A model to provide health services to hypertensive
patients through the use of mobile health technology. In: Conference Proceedings of African
Conference of Information and Communication Technology, Cape Town, South Africa, 10–
11 July (2018).
11
24. Piwek, L., Ellis, DA., Andrews, S., Joinson, A.: The Rise of Consumer Health Wearables:
Promises and Barriers. PLoS Med 13(2), (2016).
25. Security Intelligence, Wearable IoT Ransomware: Locking Down Your Life?,
https://securityintelligence.com/news/wearable-iot-ransomware-locking-down-your-life/,
last accessed 2020/1/15.
26. World Economic forum, 3 ways AI will change the nature of cyber-attacks,
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/06/ai-is-powering-a-new-generation-of-
cyberattack-its- also-our-best-defence/, last accessed 2020/1/15.
27. Dutton, W.H.: Fostering a cyber security mindset. Internet Policy Review, 6(1), (2017).
28. Bada, M.: IoTs and the need for digital norms – A global or regional issue? GigaNet Annual
Symposium, 2019 November 25, Berlin (2019), https://www.giga-
net.org/2019symposiumPapers/27_Bada_IoTs-and-the-need-for-digital-norms.pdf, last
accessed 2020/1/15.
29. Centre for Economic Policy Research Google/Fitbit will monetise health data and harm
consumers, https://euagenda.eu/upload/publications/policyinsight107.pdf.pdf, last accessed
2020/1/15.
30. Alladi, T., Chamola, V., Sikdar, B., Choo, K.R.: Consumer IoT: Security Vulnerability Case
Studies and Solutions. IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 9(2), 17-25, (2020).
31. Hilts, A., Parsons, C., Knockel, J.: Every step you fake: a comparative analysis of fitness
tracker privacy and security. Technical Report, for public dissemination. Munk School of
Global Affairs, University of Toronto: Open Effect/Citizen Lab, (2016), last accessed
2020/1/15.
32. Bourgeois, J., Kortuem, G.: Towards responsible design with Internet of Things data. In
Proceedings of the Design Society: International Conference on Engineering Design 1(1),
pp. 3421-3330, (2019).
33. Blythe J. M., Sombatruang, N., Johnson, S.D.: What security features and crime prevention
advice is communicated in consumer IoT device manuals and support pages?, Journal of
Cybersecurity, 5(1), (2019).
34. European Union: Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of Natural Persons with Regard to the Processing of
Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC
(General Data Protection Regulation). I. 119, https://tinyurl.com/h9qbbur eur-lex.europa.eu,
last accessed 2020/1/15.
35. Bada, M., Sasse, A. M., Nurse, J.R.C.: Cyber Security Awareness Campaigns: Why do they
fail to change behaviour? In: International Conference on Cyber Security for Sustainable
Society, CSSS. 2015, pp. 118-131 (2015).
36. Mannilthodi, N., Kannimoola, J. M.: Secure IoT: An Improbable Reality. In IoTBDS pp.
338-343 (2017).
37. De Zan T.: Mind the Gap: The Cyber Security Skills Shortage and Public Policy
Interventions, https://gcsec.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/cyber-ebook-definitivo.pdf,
last accessed 2020/1/15.
38. Houses of Parliament, Cyber Security of Consumer Devices. Number 593 February 2019.
