ExplainableAI (XAI) for PHM of IndustrialAsset:AState-of-The-Art,
PRISMA-Compliant Systematic Review
Ahmad Kamal BIN MOHD NOR, Srinivasa Rao PEDAPATI, Masdi MUHAMMAD,
Mechanical Department, Universiti Teknologi Petronas, Malaysia.
Email: ahmad_18002773@utp.edu.my
ABSTRACT
A state-of-the-art systematic review on XAI applied to Prognostic and Health Management (PHM)
of industrial asset is presented. The work attempts to provide an overview of the general trend of XAI
in PHM, answers the question of accuracy versus explainability, investigates the extent of human role,
explainability evaluation and uncertainty management in PHM XAI. Research articles linked to PHM
XAI, in English language, from 2015 to 2021 are selected from IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect,
SpringerLink, ACM Digital Library and Scopus databases using PRISMA guidelines. Data was
extracted from 35 selected articles and examined using MS. Excel. Several findings were synthesized.
Firstly, while the discipline is still young, the analysis indicates the growing acceptance of XAI in PHM
domain. Secondly, XAI functions as a double edge sword, where it is assimilated as a tool to execute
PHM tasks as well as a mean of explanation, in particular in diagnostic and anomaly detection. There
is thus a need for XAI in PHM. Thirdly, the review shows that PHM XAI papers produce either good
or excellent results in general, suggesting that PHM performance is unaffected by XAI. Fourthly, human
role, explainability metrics and uncertainty management are areas requiring further attention by the
PHM community. Adequate explainability metrics to cater for PHM need are urgently needed. Finally,
most case study featured on the accepted articles are based on real, industrial data, indicating that
available AI and XAI approaches are equipped to solve complex real-world challenges, increasing the
confidence of AI model’s adoption in the industry. This work is funded by the Universiti Teknologi
Petronas Foundation.
Keywords: XAI, Explainable AI, Interpretable AI, Explainable Machine Learning, Prognostic and
Health Management, PHM, PRISMA.
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. General Progress in AI
Artificial Intelligence (AI) continues its extensive penetration into emerging markets, fuelled by the
need and favourable elements of the 21st
century and the promise of prosperity backed by steady and
sizeable investment. In the last few years, AI based research show much concentration in areas such as
large-scale machine learning, deep learning, reinforcement learning, robotics, computer vision, natural
language processing and internet of Thing (IoT) [1]. According to the first AI experts report in the One
Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence, AI ability will be heavily embodied in transportation,
home robotics, healthcare, education, security and safety as well as entertainment in north American
cities by the 2030’s [1]. The increasing data volume, breakthrough in machine learning, coupled with
the pressing need to be efficient and more innovative democratize AI to the global scene. A survey done
by McKinsey recorded an annual increase of 30% in AI investment from the 2010 to 2013 and 40%
from the 2013 to 2016. In 2016 alone, the total global investment amounted to 26 to 39 billion dollars
by tech firms and external investments [2]. [3] projected that AI could potentially add up to 9 trillion
dollars thanks to automation, 6 trillion dollars in product innovation and 7 trillion dollars in global GDP
cost reduction by the 2030. AI-driven technology will lead to incremental change in labour market
requirement, where an increase in technological skill, together with higher cognitive and social-
emotional skills are expected to support AI-based infrastructures whereas manual and basic cognitive
skills will experience lesser demand [4].
AI is a technical discipline defined as the science to make computers do things that would require
intelligence if done by humans [5]. The reasoning of AI imitates natural law translated in working
algorithms [6]. Some Important fields in AI research includes Expert System (ES) consisting of rule-
based reasoning (RBR), case-based reasoning (CBR), and Fuzzy Systems (FL) and the realm of
Machine Learning (ML) such as Neural Network (NN), Support Vectors, Deep Learning (DL) and
Heuristic Algorithms [7]. Powerful nonlinear relationship modelling capability coupled with parallel
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) computing and open frameworks such as TensorFlow and Theano
within reach by literally everyone opens the door to solve many technical challenges, sometimes
surpassing human performance [8, 9]. These abilities and specialized tools make AI so appealing to
technical oriented domains such as healthcare [5], computer vision [8], image processing [6] and
reliability engineering [7].
1.2. AI in PHM
Machine learning in general, and more specifically deep learning, has played a part in reliability
research landscape, in particular PHM of industrial asset, in the recent decades [10,11,12]. PHM
provides guidelines and frameworks to safeguard the healthy state of assets. It minimizes risks,
maintenance cost and workload, thus optimizing maintenance activities. PHM is defined in IEEE
standard as “a maintenance and asset management approach utilizing signals, measurements, models,
and algorithms to detect, assess, and track degraded health, and to predict failure progression” [13].
Accordingly, 3 types of PHM activities are distinguished: failure prognostic, diagnostic, and anomaly
detection. Prognostic is the action of determining the Remaining Useful Life (RUL) or the left-over
operational time of an asset before failure [12]. Diagnostic is the action of classifying failure and, in
some extend, discovering the detailed root cause of the failure [14] while anomaly detection consists of
identifying unusual patterns going against the normal behaviour of operational indicators [15].
Various literatures support the idea of AI as being at the forefront in PHM [10,15]. A Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) neural network is employed in [16] with degradation image to estimate the RUL
of rotating machinery. A regression tree is used to predict the RUL of central heating and cooling plant
(CHCP) equipment in [17]. In [18], the combination of Logistic Regression (LR) with L2 Support
Vector Machine (SVM) are proposed for gas circulator unit prognostic. Random Forest (RF) is
employed to diagnose fault for semiconductor equipment failure in [19]. In [20], convolutional and fully
connected layers with Softmax activation are proposed to diagnose rotating machine issues. Gradient
Boosted Decision Tree (GBDT) is the best performing anomaly detection method in [21] compared to
others in detecting anomalous data in hard drives.
1.3. Black Box AI Problem
Though very powerful, many AI methods are black box in nature [22, 23]. This means that the inner
mechanism to produce output in these techniques are not known. Obviously, this opacity is an obstacle
in AI penetration across many sensitive or high investment areas such as medical, banking, finance,
defence, or the industry [24, 25] . The end user and experts of the domain in question need the assurance
that the model’s inner process is understandable [26]. Additionally, the opaqueness adds risk, bias, or
non-ethical outputs [27]. This non transparency discourage a responsible exploitation of AI methods
decisions [28], model troubleshooting [29] and improvement [26]. Moreover, it further complicates the
question of responsibility ownership in the case of wrong decision [30]. Finally, with the increasing
scrutiny and regulation on AI usage, the need to make AI methods as transparent as possible is pressing.
This includes the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the European Union (EU) and the
Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence presented by the European Commission High-
Level Expert Group on AI [31, 32, 33] .
1.4. The Need for XAI
XAI is a discipline dedicated in making AI methods more transparent, explainable, understandable
to end user, stakeholders, non-experts, and non-stakeholders alike to nurture trust in AI while
maintaining performance and effectively manage the emerging generation of artificially intelligent
partners. Interest in XAI research is reflected by the spike of search term “Explainable AI” since the
2016 and the increasing number of publications throughout the years [32]. DARPA developed the
“Explainable AI (XAI) program” in 2017 while the Chinese government announced “The Development
Plan for New Generation of Artificial Intelligence” in the same year, both promoting the dissemination
of XAI [34].
The general needs for XAI are as follows:
1. Justify decision, detect problem, and improve AI models.
2. Comply with the regulations, bias, ethics, reliability, accountability, safety, and security of AI
use in timely manners.
3. Enabling user to verify model's desirable properties, encouraging interactivity, gaining new
insights on the model or the data and augment human intuition.
4. Allow user’s task, effort, and resources to be more optimized and targeted.
5. Important when the cost of error is high or when the AI system is not yet proven to be reliable.
6. Foster the collaboration between experts, data scientists, users, and stakeholders.
1.5. Review Motivation
This paper presents a systematic review on XAI applications in PHM of industrial asset. Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines is employed [35]. It
is an evidence-based guidelines that ensure comprehensiveness, reducing bias, increasing reliability,
transparency, and clarity of the review with minimum item [36, 37]. PRISMA is a 27 checklist
guidelines that need to be satisfied as best as possible for best practice in systematic review redaction.
However, items 12–15, 18-22, and 24 were omitted as they are not relevant to this systematic review.
No protocol was registered for this study.
Rationalities motivating the compilation of this review:
1.a. Global interest in XAI: According to survey, general interest in XAI has surges since 2016 [9].
Figure 1 show the search interest expressed for “Explainable AI” in Google with 100 as being
the peak popularity for any term.
Figure 1. Interest Shown for 'Explainable AI' Term in Google Search
1.b. Specialized Reviews: In the early years of XAI, general reviews on XAI methods were written
such as [32,34]. More recently, as the discipline grows, more specialized XAI review works can
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2004-01
2004-11
2005-09
2006-07
2007-05
2008-03
2009-01
2009-11
2010-09
2011-07
2012-05
2013-03
2014-01
2014-11
2015-09
2016-07
2017-05
2018-03
2019-01
2019-11
2020-09
Interest
Over
Time
Year & Month
XAI Search Trend in Google
be found. [24],[27] and [30] present reviews on XAI in healthcare, [22] in pathology, [23] in
psychology, [29] in fintech management, [33] in neurorobotics, [25] in drug discovery, and [31]
in plant biology. It is thus urgent to compile and analyse XAI works in PHM domain which is
still absent.
1.c. PHM Nature & Regulation: PHM is normally related to high investment and safety sensitive
industrial domains. Moreover, it is pressing to ensure the use of well-regulated AI in PHM. It is
thus obvious for XAI to be promoted as much as possible and its know-how disseminated for
the benefit of PHM actors.
The objective of this review is to present an overview of XAI applications in PHM of industrial
asset. This goal is achieved by addressing the following specific points:
1.d. The general trend: Interest in PHM XAI, overview of the XAI approach employed, the
repartition of the said methods according to PHM activities and the type of case study treated.
1.e. Accuracy versus the explainability power reported in these works. According to DARPA,
model’s accuracy performance is inversed to its explainability prowess [34].
1.f. XAI role in burdening or assisting PHM tasks.
1.g. The challenges in PHM XAI progress. For this, we do cross checks with the general challenges
raised in [9, 26, 28, 32] and try to answer them in PHM perspective. Specifically:
a. The lack of explanation evaluation metrics.
b. Human role in XAI.
c. Uncertainty management, readiness against adversarial example.
This paper is organized as follow: In Section 2, the review method is introduced. Then, the literature
review is described in Section 3, followed by the discussion of the mentioned goals in Section 4. Finally,
concluding remarks are presented in last section.
2. METHOD
A single reviewer was associated with the search, the screening, and the data extraction of the
articles. Thus, no disagreement occurred in all the steps mentioned. Only peer reviewed journal articles
concerning PHM XAI of industrial asset between 2015 to 2021 in English language were selected.
Searches were done in five publication databases consisting of ScienceDirect (until 17/02/21), IEEE
Xplore (until 18/02/21), SpringerLink (until 22/02/21), ACM Digital Library (until 28/05/21) and
Scopus (27/02/21). Advance search was used in each database but since each database features are
different, specific strategy was adopted for each one. In IEEE Xplore, search was done in the Abstract
and Document title fields only as these are the most relevant options. IEEE Xplore also authorises search
within the obtained results in the Search within results field. Wildcard was not used in IEEE Xplore
even though permitted. Searches in ScienceDirect and Scopus were done respectively by using the
comprehensive keyword search in the title, abstract and keywords field: Title, abstract and author-
specified keywords field for ScienceDirect and Search within Article title, Abstract, Keywords field for
Scopus. However, contrary to Scopus, ScienceDirect does not support wildcard search, thus wildcard
was used only in Scopus search. In SpringerLink, search was done in the with all the words field only,
together with wildcards. In ACM, searches were done within both the ACM Full-Text collection and
ACM Guide for Computing Literature areas using Search Within in the title, abstract and keywords
options with wildcard. The full research strategy with keywords and filters are listed in Table 3. Once
done, the screening of duplication was executed.
Below screening steps were executed one after another for the rest of the result, with each screening
step starting in the title, then the abstract and next the keywords:
2.a. Verify again if article type is research article.
2.b. Exclude non PHM articles by identifying absence of commonly employed PHM terms such as
“prognostic”, “prognosis”, “remaining useful life”, “RUL”, “diagnostic”, “diagnosis”, “anomaly
detection”, “failure”, “fault” or “degradation”.
2.c. Exclude non XAI articles by identifying absence of commonly used XAI terms which are
“explainable”, “interpretable” and “XAI”.
2.d. Exclude non PHM XAI articles by identifying the absence of both PHM and XAI terms as
respectively indicated in step 2.b. and 2.c.
2.e. Exclude articles mentioning medical applications or network security management
Finally, the context of the articles was examined on the remaining works for final screening to retain
only PHM XAI of industrial asset publications.
The data extracted from the articles is gathered in an Ms. Excel file. Directly retained variables are
author, publication year, title, publisher, and publication/journal name. Once final selection is achieved,
the article context analysis is performed, and further information is extracted:
2.f. PHM activity category – Either anomaly detection, prognostic, or diagnostic. Structural damage
detection as well as binary failure prediction are considered as diagnostic.
2.g. XAI approach employed – The category of XAI method.
2.h. Recorded performance – Reported accuracy of non XAI method or XAI method. Some papers
clearly claim the comparability or the superiority of the proposed method over other tested
methods. In the case where comparison is not done, the reported standalone accuracy result was
evaluated and classified as either “good” or “satisfying” for a medium outcome or deemed “very
good” or “excellent” if the accuracy is near perfect. When a method is superior to the rest, it is
equal to “very good” unless detailed as only “good”. When mixed performance of good and very
good are recorded for the same method, it is quantified as only “good”.
2.i. XAI role in assisting PHM task – Here, XAI role in strengthening PHM ability is investigated.
2.j. The existence of explainability evaluation metrics.
2.k. Human role in PHM XAI works.
2.l. Uncertainty management – Uncertainty management in either any of the stage of the PHM
method or XAI approach increases the possibility for adoption by user due to additional surety.
2.m. Case study type – real or simulated. Real is considered when data is coming from a real
mechanical device. Simulated is considered when data is generated using simulation software.
3. RESULTS
3.1. Screening Results
3048 papers were selected by the databases according to the applied keywords with their respective
quantity as shown in Table 3. 288 articles were screened out as duplicates. Out of the 2760 remaining,
25 papers had to be screened out as they are editorial or news documents. Then, 70 papers were selected
according to criteria 2.a. - 2.e. from the remaining 2735 articles. Finally, only 35 papers were selected
as 35 articles were deemed non relevant with the review topic after context verification. The final
selection and the excluded articles with the rejection causes are disclosed respectively in Table 1 and
Table 2. The PRISMA flow diagram of the selection and screening process is shown in Figure 2.
The repartition of the selected articles domain as well as its publisher are presented in Figure 3 and
Figure 4. The repartition of the excluded articles domain as well as its publisher are presented in Figure
5 and Figure 6. As can be seen from Figure 3, diagnostic research dominates XAI PHM articles. Figure
4 illustrates that IEEE and Elsevier as being the biggest source of the accepted XAI articles.
Numerous unselected publications, though related to XAI, correspond to process monitoring PHM
research as shown in Figure 5. These works were excluded as they are closely related to quality context
rather than PHM. Some papers are concentrated on product rather than the industrial asset. Furthermore,
the anomaly described is seldom associated with disturbance in industrial process rather than failure
degradation. Studies concerning network security were also omitted. Here also, most of the excluded
technical papers come from Elsevier and IEEE as confirmed by Figure 6, further showing that these
publishers are the main sources of much XAI related technical papers.
Figure 3. Accepted Article Topic Repartition
PHM Topic on Accepted Articles Repartition
Diagnostic Prognostic Anomaly Detection
ScienceDirect
01/01/15-17/02/21
(n = 607)
IEEE Xplore
01/01/15-18/02/21
(n = 144)
SpringerLink
01/01/15-22/02/21
(n = 291)
Scopus
01/01/15-27/02/21
(n = 1931)
ACM Digital
Library
01/01/15-28/05/21
(n = 75)
Total citation(s)
(n = 3048)
Non-duplicate
citation(s) (n = 2760)
Application of Inclusion
& Exclusion Criteria
Application of Inclusion
& Exclusion Criteria
Included citation(s)
(n = 70)
Included citation(s)
(n = 35)
Exclusion Criteria:
Criteria 2.a to 2.e in Title,
Abstract and Keywords
Excluded citation(s) (n = 2690)
Exclusion Criteria:
Non PHM-XAI of industrial
asset in Full Text
Excluded citation(s) (n = 35)
Figure 2. PRISMA Flow Diagram for Selection and Screening
Figure 4. Accepted Articles Publisher Repartition
Figure 5. Excluded Articles Topic Repartition
Figure 6. Excluded Articles Publisher Repartition
Accepted Articles Publisher Repartition
Elsevier IEEE MDPI
Springer ACM ASTM
Taylor & Francis Sage
Topic on Excluded Article Repartition
Process Monitoring Non PHM-XAI Medical
Network Security Others
Excluded Articles Publisher Repartition
Elsevier IEEE MDPI ACS T&F Wiley ACM
3.2. Literature Review
3.2.1. Interpretable Approach
3.2.1.1. Interpretable Model
Interpretable models consist of structures that are easily interpretable. These structures are built a
priori in the model, thus intrinsic in explainability, which enables a more transparent understanding of
feature-output relationship by peeking directly into the model’s mechanism. Interpretability is achieved
by using simple structures that are highly interpretable such as linear regression model, logistic
regression, or decision tree. A linear regression for example, links a weighted sum of independent
variables to the dependent variable. The change of one unit in an independent variable’s value will
change the dependent variable by the concerning independent variable’s weight, while the rest of
independent variables value remain fixed.
In [38], an interpretable logistic regression model with elastic net regularization is employed in high
pressure plunger pump anomaly detection. Data is first equally divided, and statistic measures are
calculated on each division. A rolling window operation is then applied on the extracted features where
flag is associated indicating if a failure will occur or not based on the statistical measure calculated
before. The flagged representations, having the most relevant features associated with failure, serve as
input to the regularized logistic regression. The relevance order of features to be included from the
flagged representations is determined by considering the normal/failure feature distributions and
measuring their Kolmogorov–Smirnov distance. The accuracy of the model is good and feature
importance is exploited to improve model performance.
[39] presents the Dynamic Structure–Adaptive Symbolic Approach (DSASA), a cross-domain life
prediction model that is interpretable for slewing bearings RUL prediction. DSASA presents internal
model structures visibly, takes historical run-to-failure data into account, and dynamically adapts real-
time deterioration. In a nutshell, multi-signal-based health indicators are fed into three genetic
programming algorithms for symbolic life modelling. Symbolic life models visually displayed the life
modelling process in the manner of legible mapping relationships and obtained ideal RUL prediction
results. Then, DSASA reconstructs original life expressions from the initial symbolic life model and
uses dynamic coupling terms and its exponents to track the real-time asset deterioration. The recorded
performance is better than previously employed method for the case study and contributed by XAI
ability.
An interpretable Structured-Effect Neural Network, 𝑆𝐸𝑁𝑁𝛩,which consist of a non-parametric
baseline, a linear component of the current condition and a recurrent component is proposed in [40] for
turbofan prognostic application. Eq. 1 represents the model. Here, the first component, 𝜆(𝑡) is the non-
parametric part consisting of probabilistic lifetime model. The second component is the linear
component that can be used with raw sensor readings, 𝑋𝑡, where the importance of features can be
evaluated based on the linear coefficients. The third component, 𝑅𝑁𝑁𝛩, refers to recurrent neural
network with weights Θ. The recurrent component thus needs to explain lesser variance of the data
compared to pure neural network structure. The performance of the model surpassed other traditional
machine learning methods except LSTM. However, XAI do not contribute to this performance.
𝑆𝐸𝑁𝑁𝛩(𝑡; 𝑋𝑡, . . . 𝑋1) = 𝜆(𝑡) + 𝛽𝑇
𝑋𝑡 + 𝑅𝑁𝑁𝛩 (𝑋𝑡, . . . 𝑋1, 𝑡) (1)
A real-time damage localization model for mechanical structure based on interpretable physical-
digital twin is proposed in [41]. The digital twin consists of a physic-based and a machine learning
model. The physic-based model is a computational model that represents the physical twin. The physical
twin translates the damaged structure, whose sensor data is available. It simulates the degradation of
during online mode and produces synthetic training data for the machine learning classification model,
here, quadratic discriminant model. Once trained, the data from the sensors and actuators of the physical
twin in turn are fed to the digital twin. When degradation occurs, the machine learning model classifies
the degradation class, while the physic-based model interprets the phenomenon. The method is applied
to spring-mass system damage detection with good accuracy and XAI is used only for explanation
purpose.
In [42], the Generative Topographic Mapping (GTM) and Random Forest (RF) are tested as binary
disruptive classification models for disruption prediction algorithms on DIII-D and JET Tokamaks,
specifically in impurity accumulation phenomenon in both DIII-D and JET discharges. The GTM is an
interpretable model while the RF output can be expressed as a sum of feature contributions. These
methods are trained on DIII-D and tested on JET discharges data and vice-versa. Various Peaking
factors are employed together with these models as indicators of the studied disruption precursors. The
additional physic-based indicators improve interpretability by tracking early anomalies in real time
monitoring. No performance comparison and quantitative result are recorded in this work and XAI is
only employed here to interpret the prediction.
Interpretable equation is presented in [43]. The interpretation of the boundary between disruptive
and non-disruptive in Tokamaks operating zones is obtained by generating a physically relevant
equation accomplished by applying Symbolic Regression (SR) via Genetic Programming (GP) to the
outputs of Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Classification and Regression Trees (CART)
ensembles. GP, with the help of a fitness function, help to choose the best mathematical expressions
candidate that could solve the regression problem. The performance is good and comparable to other
machine learning tools used previously but not due to XAI approach.
3.2.1.2. Tree-Based Interpretability
[44] presents a graphical diagnosis technique based on Convolutional Neural network (CNN) and
extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), applied on gas turbine failure problem. It replaces portions of
the CNN architecture with XG-boost, a machine learning approach for classification and regression,
and makes the CNN training model interpretable. XGBoost is a boosting method that combines several
weak classifiers into a single strong classifier. The Classification and Regression Tree (CART) is the
weak classifier utilised by XGBoost. CART is a binary tree that splits by looking for the best
segmentation feature and cut point using the GINI coefficient as a criterion. The time series data are fed
into the CNN. When comparable signals are clustered together, the local features will improve, allowing
CNN to be more accurate. These signals may be sorted with XGBoost, improving feature order
interpretability. To determine the accuracy, the original raw data obtained from the gas turbine is first
fed into the CNN. The signal rankings from the initial raw data, as well as the accuracy gained by CNN,
are then trained in XGBoost to produce tree models that can choose the optimal features-accuracy
sorting combinations. The diagnostic accuracy obtained from this method is better than other tested
techniques, contributed by the tree based interpretable method.
3.2.1.3. Decision Rules & Knowledge-Based
Knowledge based approach and decision rules are closely linked. Decision rules can be predefined
by expert knowledge or automatically generated. The explanation can be intrinsic or post-hoc. These
interpretable rules normally follow the if-then convention representing the input-output dynamic.
[45] proposes the Fused-AI interpretabLe Anomaly Generation System (FLAGS) which combines
both knowledge-driven (KD) and data-driven (DD) abilities for anomaly detection, failure recognition
and root cause analysis of train. FLAGS consists of 3 stages. In the first phase, both KD and DD Fault
Recognition (FR) & Root Cause Analysis (RCA) using data from Failure Mode and Effect Analysis
(FMEA) and Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) are employed simultaneously. The data streams and case-
specific context data are used as inputs. Faults from the KD or outliers from the DD are produced with
interpretation of the detected anomalies and stored inside a knowledge graph (KG). In the second phase,
the detected anomalies are shown in a dashboard (Dynamic Dashboard) complete with the raw data and
interpretation. User modification is authorised. This is also stored in the KG. Finally, in the third phase,
the information in the KG which are anomalies, the feedback, and all contextual meta-information, is
used to improve the AD, FR & RCA techniques of both KD and DD. The reported accuracy is good for
anomaly detection, better than other standalone DD methods, partly because of XAI approach.
[46] presents a K-margin-based intErpretable lEarNing (KEEN) for interpretable aircraft structural
damage diagnosis. This framework consists of a Residual Convolution Recurrent Neural Network
(RCR-Net), a K-margin diagnostic method and a knowledge-directed interpretation approach. RCR-
Net is a deep learning model that can automatically obtain features and deal with class skewness issues.
As input, it accepts augmented data segments. After that, it divides the augmented segments into small
fragments and outputs the segment's health-condition prognosis. The K-margin based diagnosis model
is robust against noise. It focuses on the RCR-Net's most relevant segments automatically. Its health-
condition detector uses segments with top-K confident to estimate the health status. Simultaneously, a
knowledge-based interpretation approach automatically extracts features from the RCR-Net responsible
for the fault. The performance result recorded is only satisfying while XAI is only used for explanation.
[47] proposes a Knowledge-based Deep Belief Network (KBDBN) that extracts and transfers rules
(confidence and classification) from an initial Deep Belief Network (DBN) to a new DBN. The DBN
consists of numerous Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) equipped with classification layer. The
RBMs and the classification layer are used to derive the confidence rules and new classification rules,
respectively. The initial DBN is firstly trained with some of the data. Then, the confidence rules
describing the RBMs are extracted from the RBMs using a rule extraction algorithm (RBM_CRE). The
new classification rules, on the other hand, are created using a mixture of the trained DBN classification
rules and the extracted confidence rules using the Rule-INF algorithm. The data is transformed into
beliefs through the inference of the first level of confidence rule. Finally, the belief is incorporated in
the classification rules using Rule-INF algorithm. The method showed excellent performance and
surpassed deep learning-based techniques due to XAI decision rule.
In [48], a fuzzy Levenberg–Marquardt–GA technique is used to diagnose rotary kiln failure. The
mean square error is firstly reduced and saved. Multiple chromosomes of the genetic algorithm are then
encoded to get their relative fitness values based on the preliminary MSE results. The genetic algorithm
produces new populations via crossings and mutations based on the fitness value of each chromosome.
The evolution process yields a minimum mean square error combined with a better fitness value of
fuzzy rules selection. Finally, the best rule subset can be obtained and used with Bayes decision rule for
classification. The reported classification accuracy is very good due to XAI.
A fuzzy extreme learning machine (F-ELM) is proposed in [49] for circulating water system failure
diagnosis. The F-ELM consists of extreme learning machine (ELM) where fuzzy membership functions
and rules are embedded into the hidden layer. The Fuzzy if-then rules are formulated by a rule-
combination matrix, or C matrix. A Don’t Care (DC) matrix minimizes the number of produced rules.
The standard deviation of the membership function, the C and DC matrices are randomly initialized.
Finally, the output weights of the F-ELM are used to calculate the target class and confidence factor for
each of the rules. The reported accuracy is good, contributed by the XAI decision rule ability.
[50] considers the case where monotonicity relationship (increasing or decreasing) is assumed to be
known in some features with the output class. For binary classification, two isotonic boosting
procedures called Simple Isotonic LogitBoost (SILB) and Multiple Isotonic LogitBoost (MILB) based
on Additive Logistic Regression (LogitBoost) are developed. In SILB, a weighted isotonic regression
is introduced in the iterative function fitting step for variables that are assumed to have monotonic
relation with the output. Meanwhile, in MILB, an additive weighted regression consisting of isotonic
regression is fitted for monotonic features through backfitting algorithm. The produced rules follow
monotonic relation between the features and output, thus easily interpretable. The author also developed
boosting algorithms for multiclass classification following the same principle. Results from the
proposed rule based XAI approach are good and comparable to other known methods.
[51] presents K-PdM, a cluster-based hidden Markov model (cHMM) for turbofan engine RUL
prediction based on multiple features. The method uncovers the fine-grained deteriorating modes of
machines through each unlabelled feature data and learns a mapping between each deteriorating feature
index and RULs. Accordingly, an overall deterioration estimation and RUL prediction are able to be
achieved based on the combination of each feature’s deterioration estimation. Moreover, a set of
interpretable semantic rules are set up to analyse the root cause of performance deterioration among
features. The rules are extracted using (Semantic Web of Thing) SWoT framework. K-PdM leverages
two HMM-based clustering methods, pattern-based (pHMM) and Multi-branch HMM (MB-HMM). A
hidden Markov model (HMM) is a probabilistic model in which the state process is hidden and can only
be disclosed by observation. Each KPI may be represented as an HMM to represent the fine-grained
degrading mode. To begin with, each KPI time series is converted into a symbolic sequence using the
clustering algorithms. The observation sequence of the HMM is then initialised using the symbolic
sequence. Using the expanded Viterbi method, the optimum state sequence is then found. The total
deterioration may be predicted using the estimation combination on each KPI once the fine-grained
degrading mode is learnt. The prognostic result is better than most data driven methods except for
LSTM and the rules are only used for explanation.
3.2.1.4. Logic Analysis of Data (LAD)
LAD is an interpretable classification method. LAD classifies data and extracts interpretable patterns
and produce interpretable rules from the variable instances. The process of extracting pattern in LAD
is long as every observation in the dataset needs to belong to at least one pattern. If the explainability
obtained cannot be confirmed by experts, further pattern extraction will be needed. LAD also depends
on labelled dataset to perform binarization, thus is purely supervised method.
[52] presents a process diagnostic-explanation structure consisting of knowledge discovery in
database (KDD) method and FTA. The KDD method, in specific LAD, extracts patterns from the
process dataset and produces rule-based explanation describing the root cause of failure. This
explanation is later translated into FTA logic reasoning. The ability of this method is demonstrated in
an actuator system failure diagnosis. The reported diagnostic result is excellent, contributed by LAD.
3.2.2. Extraction-Based Interpretability
Interpretability could come from important features extracted by feature extraction or dimensionality
reduction techniques such as encoder in Autoencoder or Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
3.2.2.1. Autoencoder (AE)-Based Interpretability
In principle, AE-based methods take the original input data via its encoder and compress it into
smaller, latent representation. The latent representation contains important, interpretable information
representing the data. Then the decoder is fed with the latent representation and try to reconstruct the
original data. The quality of the reconstruction is measured through the reconstruction loss between the
encoder and the decoder. The loss can also be used as anomaly indicator when the loss surpasses a
defined threshold.
The Spectrum Anomaly Detector with Interpretable Feature (SAIFE) is an Adversarial
Autoencoders (AAE) based model applied on the problem of wireless spectrum anomaly detection [53].
LSTM acts as the encoder for extracting interpretable features such as signal bandwidth, class, and
centre frequency via a linear layer and classifying signal via a Softmax layer. A CNN acts as decoder
for reconstructing the input data from the extracted features. The AAE architecture is trained in a semi-
supervised fashion for learning interpretable features, while the reconstruction is fully unsupervised.
The model learns the features during the semi-supervised training with partial data. During testing,
anomaly is detected based on the reconstruction error, classification error and the loss from the
discriminator which is part of AAE generator-discriminator adversarial architecture, Anomaly
localization is achieved by plotting the absolute reconstruction error. SAIFE is reported to perform
generally better than other tested methods with assistance of XAI.
In [54], an autoencoder with explanation discriminator is employed for continuous batch washing
(CBW) equipment anomaly detection. The autoencoder's reconstruction error, which is the anomaly
indicator, is used by the discriminator to measure the precision and accuracy measurement of the
anomaly detection task. The discriminator rescales the reconstruction error using a sigmoidal function
giving value 0 as normal, 1 as anomaly and between 0 and 1 as warning. The performance of the
proposed method is comparable to the best technique, isolation forest, previously employed for the
problem, assisted by XAI approach.
3.2.3. Filter Based Interpretability
Filtering important features that will be fed to PHM models enables the connection between failure
and root cause analysis.
In [55], a SincNet interpretable neural network is proposed for electrical and mechanical motor
failure diagnosis. SincNet consists of CNN with interpretable convolutional sinc bandpass filter in the
first convolutional layer. This filter learns the low and high cut-off frequencies responsible for the fault
from the raw signal. To visualize the features learned by the network, the learned filter kernels are
shown in both time and frequency domains. The paper reported superiority of the proposed method over
other tested approaches, and this is directly contributed by XAI technique.
In [56], TScatNet is proposed for bearing and drive train failure diagnosis. TScatNet collects
domain-invariant features utilising Morlet wavelet and uses these features for diagnosis purpose.
TScatNet consists of a time-scattering (Scat) module of standard CNN having Morlet wavelets as
convolutional filters and a Softmax module comprising of global averaging pooling (GAP) and Softmax
layer. The Scat module transforms the input into scattering features maps. At testing phase, these maps
are passed to the global averaging pooling (GAP) layer. The GAP layer aids in the simplification of
testing processes and improves the stability of the derived scattering characteristic. The Softmax layer
maps each scattering feature into the probability value of fault categories. TScatNet result surpassed
other tested methods, aided by XAI ability.
In [57], a Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) is used in the first convolutional layer of a CNN
to extract the features representation responsible for the failure. The CWConv layer consists of wavelet
kernels with different scale and translation parameters. It turns raw signal in the temporal domain into
the time–frequency domain with a wavelet basis function. It performs the convolution operation with a
predefined wavelet functions 𝜓𝑢,𝑠(𝑡) with time-domain expressions that only depends on two learnable
parameters (𝑢 and 𝑠). The interpretability of the model is illustrated from the visualization of the feature
map of the CWConv layer and its waveforms as well as signals matching. The method is applied to
bearing, helical gear and aeroengine bevel gear failure dataset. XAI technique reportedly improve the
accuracy of the CNN by 10%.
3.2.4. Cluster based Interpretability
Clustering is used to identify failure pattern consisting of a set of known failure features
combination. The recognised failure pattern can thus be interpretable in this sense.
[58] proposed an unsupervised fault diagnosis for rolling bearing by using the convolutional neural
network (CNN) and Fuzzy C-means (FCM) clustering algorithm. CNN is first utilized to automatically
extract features from rolling bearing vibration signals. Then, the principal component analysis (PCA)
is used to reduce the dimension of the extracted features, thus extracting interpretable features, and the
first two principal components are selected as the fault feature vectors and input to FCM. The FCM
algorithm then clusters the data in the derived feature space, revealing the different fault types. Aiming
at minimizing the Euclidean distance and the weighted sum of fuzzy membership of all data points and
each clustering centre, FCM constantly modifies the clustering centre and classification matrix to meet
the termination criteria and clusters data samples with similar characteristics into one class. Even though
no comparison is done with traditional ML methods, the classification accuracy is very good,
contributed by the extraction of interpretable features.
Emission control system fault diagnosis method based on PCA clustering is presented in [59]. The
sensor data is firstly treated with PCA for dimensionality reduction. This sensor data is mapped to
relative air/fuel ratio target, which represents normal or degraded operation. The result of the PCA then
undergo PCA-based clustering (Vectorized PCA-VPCA, Multilinear Principal Component Analysis-
MPCA or Uncorrelated Multilinear PCA-UMPCA clustering). The PCA-based clusters isolate fault
events in a restricted number of clusters (scenarios), each one described by a reference pattern. Once
the data have been partitioned into clusters (scenarios), practitioners analyse cluster patterns to get more
insight for fault diagnosis. This provides practitioners with an efficient and interpretable model of
multichannel profile data in high-dimensional spaces to support the diagnosis and finding root cause.
The recorded results of the PCA-based clustering are very good and contributed by the PCA-based
feature extraction.
3.2.5. Attention Mechanism
Attention mimics the cognitive capability of human being in focusing on selective information of a
larger context. In AI explainability, this involves projecting certain part of the input responsible in
accomplishing the intended task, often in the form of heat map or saliency map.
In [60], the self-monitoring, analysis, and reporting technology (SMART) is used to detect and
predict failure in hard drives through SMART statistics in the Attention-augMENted Deep architecture
(AMENDER) model. The SMART statistics daily record is incorporated into vectors through the
feature integration layer. Then, these vectors are fed into the temporal dependency extraction layer
consisting of gated recurrent unit (GRU) which output can be considered as a compact representation
of the SMART temporal sequence of the observed days. The attention distribution is calculated from
the healthy context vector and the SMART compact representation. The healthy context vector is
considered to be the high-level feature representation of healthy hard drives. The resultant distribution,
together with the GRU hidden state produces attentional hidden state of the corresponding days. This
attention mechanism enables the model to focus on failure advancement. The attentional hidden state
can then be used to determine the health of the hard drive for the associated day. The model performance
is better than other tested methods in both hard drive health status classification and prognostic. The
attention mechanism contributed to this performance, besides being the mechanism for diagnostic.
Gradient Weighted Class Activation Map (Grad-CAM) visualizes where a convolutional neural
network model is looking when classifying. It is capable of creating distinct visualizations for different
classes of image presented together, thus, is a class specific approach. Grad-Cam can be used after any
gradient-based method that is placed after the feature maps of the last convolutional layer of a CNN. In
[61], classification of Linear Motion guide fault based on CNN applied to vibration signal and
explainability with frequency domain-based Grad-CAM (FG-CAM) are proposed to analyse
frequencies that have a significant impact on fault conditions. The reported classification accuracy is
very good. XAI method is however only used as classification explanation in this paper. The same
methodology is employed in [62] to visualize features influencing failure in bearings where the
vibration signal is transformed into time-frequency spectra using short-time Fourier transform (STFT).
Failure features detected using Grad-CAM are correctly validated using other AI models. No
performance comparison is performed with other methods.
CAM is different from Grad-Cam in the sense that it works directly after CNN. CAM is also class
specific. Firstly, the average of each feature maps is calculated. These numbers are connected to the
prediction classes by a fully connected layer whose weights for each connection shall be obtained after
training. Finally, the heatmap for a specific class is obtained by the weighted combination of the feature
maps whose weights are the learned fully connected layer weights. An automatic vision diagnostic
technique using a combination of CNN and CAM for base-excited cantilever beam and water pump
system fault diagnostic presented in [63]. While the CNN detect faults, the CAM localizes the faults.
Additionally, CAM provides the diagnostic explainability, making the method a white box model. The
model reportedly classified damage with a very good accuracy. The CAM however is just employed
for explanation purpose.
In [64], a CNN is used to diagnose failure in Ford Motor dataset and industrial case study of sapphire
grinding. Then, CAM is employed to explain or diagnose the fault. Variational Autoencoder (VAE), in
turn, acts as misclassification indicator for false fault detection occurring in the upstream stage. The
VAE is trained with only the true positive (TP) and true negative (TN) outcomes produced in the fault
detection and diagnosis process using CAM. After the VAE training, the latent variable containing the
manifold of the CAM corresponding to the TP and TN is calculated using the encoder of the VAE to
set the upper control limit UCLT
2
PCA and UCLQPCA of the PCA-based T2
PCA and QPCA charts that will
signal anomaly corresponding to false positive (FP) and false negative (FN) of the fault detection
process. Finally, in the test phase, the CAM generated by means of the misclassification and
misdiagnosis that may occur is subjected to post-processing by means of VAE-based PCA charts to do
process monitoring. By doing this, misclassified generated CAM will be tagged as anomaly by the
VAE. The performance is considered good as the method showed very good result on simulated data
but only satisfying on real data. XAI is proven to improve the model’s accuracy in both of the case
studies.
3.2.6. Model Agnostic Explanation
Model-agnostic explanation works by analysing trained black box AI model input and output. It is
flexible, in the sense that it can be used to explain any type of machine learning models. As an external
approach, model agnostic explanation does not directly add to the ability of PHM tasks.
Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) is a surrogate model approach that
approximates the desired model using an interpretable one. The explanation is local as LIME is only
developed to explain the behaviour of the classifier "around" the instance being predicted. LIME creates
a new dataset from the permuted data samples and the outputs of the original model. Then LIME trains
an interpretable model such as Lasso which approximates the original model, using the manipulated
dataset. It creates local explanation by disturbing the neighbours of the interested input to see how the
prediction of the interpretable model behaves. A fouling prediction in crossflow heat exchanger using
feed-forward neural network architecture with LIME model agnostic explainability is presented in [65].
The model is fed with operational data such as inlet fluid temperatures, ratio of fouled fluid flow rates
to flow rates under clean conditions, and output fluid temperatures from the heat exchanger and predicts
fouling resistances of the equipment. The predictive accuracy is very good.
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), is a game theoretic approach to explain the output of any
machine learning model. It evaluates the contribution of each feature to the prediction by using Shapley
values. SHAP can be both global and local explainability approaches. Shapley values determine the
importance of a single feature by considering the outcome of each possible combination of features. In
other word, the Shapley value is the average expected marginal contribution of a feature across all
possible combination of features. In [66], a deep-stacked convolutional bidirectional LSTM, equipped
with SHAP explainability for turbofan engine prognostic is proposed. The prognostic accuracy is
recorded better than other tested methods.
A feed forward neural network (FFNN) together with SHAP (global) and LIME (local) are employed
to predict and explain the damage of prismatic cantilever steel beam in [67]. The frequencies and
associated damage percentage ranging from 0% to 75% are used as input features and the distance,
corresponding to 194 positions of damage are used as target of the FFNN. The reported prediction result
is very good. LIME is also used to improve the model.
3.2.7. Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation (LRP)
Layer Wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) is a technique to visualize the importance of input features
of a deep learning prediction. Like attention, LRP explains the data processing. It traces back the
contributions of input nodes to the final prediction by propagating backward the relevance measures
from the output to the input through the nodes of the model. By doing so, a heatmap of features relevant
to the output class can be constructed at the input space. LRP generally does not assist in improving
model’s task.
Diagnosis of induction motor fault using CNN and LRP is proposed in [68]. The vibration time
series data segments used as input are transformed into time-frequency image using Continuous
Wavelet Transform (CWT) with Morlet wavelet which is then processed by CNN for classification.
LRP captures pixel-level representation of features contributing to the failure. Excellent accuracy
diagnosis results are obtained using CNN but not contributed by LRP which only serves as explanation
tool.
3.2.8. Other Approaches
Visually visible AI model can be beneficial as the inner working mechanism is transparent and can
be analysed. [69] proposed a comprehensive visual explanation tool applied to turbofan engine
prognostic. This online diagnostic, prognostic, and situation awareness system works with streaming
data and is divided into numerous sections: Machine learning–based classifier, Visualization dashboard
for health state monitoring, Cybersecurity command centre and High-performance local servers. The
visualisation dashboard displays real-time predictive analytics to reveal potential flaws, risks, and
harmful attacks. In the form of heat maps, users may view the input and output. One heat-map for each
sensor input and related engine at each time step. The network weights of each layer may be examined
by users to see how each feature contributes to the output of the following layer. The network weights
are represented by the line thickness. The greater the weight values, the thicker the lines are. Users may
also customise model hyper-parameters like the number of layers, hidden units, weights in each layer,
regularizer types, and regularizer parameters to integrate their expertise into the learning process. No
quantitative result is however presented in the paper.
Prototype-based explanation is presented in [70]. ProtoSteer is a prototype based explainable
diagnosis applied to vehicle fault diagnosis. ProtoSteer (Prototype Steering) is a flexible explainable
ML system with ProSeNet (Prototype Sequence Network) at its core. The system consists of storage
module for data and model, a model manager, an analytic module, a query module, and a user visual
interface. ProSeNet consists of a sequence encoder, a prototype layer, and a fully connected layer with
Softmax for classification. ProSeNet, an interpretable model, learns a small set of prototypes or cases
from historical data of the interested system where it then constructs a small set of prototypical
sequences. In the testing phase, new inputs are compared with the prototypes in a latent space for
inference. ProtoSteer also provides user friendly interface of the prototypes to enable users to inspect,
critique or refine the model by adding, deleting, or revising the prototypes. ProtoSteer is applied to
vehicle fault prediction. There is however no quantitative result indicated in this work.
An interpretable Stationary Subspaces-Vector Autoregressive with Exogenous Terms (SSVARX) is
presented in [71] for prognostic of rolling and slewing bearings. Firstly, multi-channel vibration signals
are transformed using Stationary Subspace Analysis (SSA) into stationary and non-stationary
components. Then, the features time and frequency domains of the non-stationary signals are extracted
before going through a double SSA treatment, where its stationary result's differential representation is
used to extract endogenous (dependent) variable or variables and exogenous (independent) variables.
Stationary test using augmented dickey fuller (ADF) and optimal lag order determination using Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC) from the endogenous variable are executed next. Impulse response analysis
is then executed to analyse the relationship between the endogenous variables. Finally, the SSVARX’s
parameters are estimated using maximum likelihood estimation and the endogenous and exogenous
variables. The result from the proposed method fare better than the rest of the tested techniques and
comparable to previous published outcome. XAI plays a role in contributing to this performance.
[72] presents a bearing fault diagnosis method with the interpretable frequency temporal logic (FTL)
semantics language to alleviate the difficulty of understanding the decision process. FTL, a derivation
of Signal temporal logic (STL) defines the time-frequency properties of time series signals. Bayesian
neural networks together with Bayesian optimization are employed to find the structure and parameters
of the FTL semantics, solving the fault diagnosis problem with limited computation cost. The method
shows very good performance compared to other tested methods, assisted by XAI approach.
4. DISCUSSION
4.1. General Trend in PHM XAI
As shown in Table 1 and summarized in Figure 7, accepted articles according to publication year
shows an upward trend, with a major spike in 2020. This indicates a growing interest in XAI from the
PHM domain researchers. The number of accepted articles is however still very small. This reflects the
infancy state of XAI in PHM. Diagnostic domain occupies a majority share amongst the accepted works
as presented in Figure 3. Looking at the “XAI Assist PHM” column in Table 1, it can be seen that XAI
boosts diagnostic ability. Drawing a parallel between these two information from Figure 3 and Table 1,
it can be deduced that XAI is particularly appealing to diagnostic as it can be applied as diagnostic tool
directly or in addition to other methods. XAI could provide additional incentive to diagnostic whose
main objective is to discover the features responsible for the failure as shown in Figure 8. This
interesting point signifies that diagnostic task in these papers are dependent to XAI approach. XAI is
thus not only an additional feature in diagnostic but has also become an indispensable tool, a need in
PHM. The same phenomenon is observed in anomaly detection as presented in Figure 8. Knowing the
cause of anomaly could potentially avoid false alarm, preventing resources wastage on error. XAI can
thus be employed as a double-edged sword to execute PHM tasks and explains it. Additionally,
interpretable model, rule & knowledge based as well as attention mechanism are the three most
employed approaches as indicated in Figure 9.
Figure 7. Accepted Articles According to Year
0
5
10
15
20
25
2015 2018 2019 2020
Quantity
Year
Accepted Articles According to Year
Figure 8. PHM Contribution to PHM Tasks
Figure 9. XAI Approach According to Type
4.2. Accuracy vs Explainability
Table 1 revealed that some XAI methods that are employed directly in PHM tasks achieved excellent
performance. Furthermore, the recorded performance of both non XAI methods (works that depend on
XAI for explanation only) or XAI methods are mostly very good for diagnostic and prognostic, as
illustrated in Figure 10. In short, no bad results were found in all the PHM areas as confirmed by Figure
10. Whether the results are contributed by XAI methods or not, we can safely conclude that
explainability does not affect the accuracy in PHM tasks in the studied works.
Figure 10. Accuracy of Methods
0
5
10
15
20
25
Diagnostic Prognostic Anomaly detection
PHM Contribution to PHM Task
yes no
0
2
4
6
Quantity
XAI Approach Employed
0
5
10
15
20
25
Diagnostic Prognostic Anomaly detection
Accuracy in PHM Task
Very Good Good
4.3. Human Role in XAI & Explainability Metrics
Very little role was played by human in the examined works as illustrated in Figure 11. In a more
serious observation, the usage of explainability evaluation metrics is nearly non-existent as presented
in Figure 12. Human participation is vital for evaluating the explanation of XAI approach. Human
involvement is encouraged for the development of interactive AI, where expert opinion presents an
additional guarantee in AI performance. Additionally, explainability metrics help researchers and users
to evaluate the explanation quality. This element is obviously lacking in PHM XAI works. It is
recommended that evaluation metrics adequate for PHM application explanation, considering security
and safety risk, maintenance cost, time, and gain to be developed and adopted. [73] developed an
overview of evaluation metrics and methods. [74] studies the effectiveness of explanation from experts
to non-experts while [75] proposes a metric to assess the quality of medical explanation.
Figure 11. Human Role Repartition
Figure 12. Explainability Metrics Repartition
4.4. Uncertainty Management
Various types of uncertainty management approach had been adopted in the studied works as
detailed in Table 1. Uncertainty management gives additional surety to users to adopt PHM XAI
methods compared to point estimate methods. Furthermore, uncertainty quantification is vital to provide
additional security to AI infrastructure against adversarial example, either unintentionally or motivated
by attack. This measure could minimize the risk of wrong explanation being produced from unseen data
due to adversarial example. It is observed in Figure 13 however, that much improvement is still required
in this area.
Human Role/Intervention Repartition
Yes No
Explainability Metrics Repartition
Yes No
Figure 13. Uncertainty Management Repartition
4.5. Case Study Type
It is observed that most case studies used to demonstrate the effectiveness of XAI methods are using
real industrial data as reflected in Figure 14. This positive outlook proves that available XAI techniques
are able to solve real world complex industrial challenges with at least a good performance, increasing
the confidence for AI model’s adoption.
Figure 14. Case Study Type Repartition
4.6. Study Implications & Limitations
4.6.1. Implications
4.a XAI in PHM is still in its early years but gaining attention – Much unexplored opportunity
is still available for PHM researchers to advance the assimilation of XAI in PHM.
4.b Interpretable model, rule & knowledge based as well as attention mechanism are the most
widely used XAI techniques – More research involving other approaches could give
additional insight to the PHM community in term of performance, ease of use and flexibility
of the XAI method.
4.c XAI is used as a tool to execute PHM tasks by the majority of diagnostic and anomaly
detection works, while simultaneously being an instrument of explanation – XAI could be
preferred or required within PHM compared to standalone method.
4.d PHM performance is uninfluenced by XAI – Increases the confidence of PHM practitioner
and end user in AI model’s adoption.
Uncertainty Management Repartition
Yes No
Case Study Type Repartition
Real Simulated
4.e Lack of development in human role, explainability metrics and uncertainty management –
Future efforts need to be concentrated in these areas amongst other in the future.
Furthermore, the development of evaluation metrics that can cater PHM needs is urgently
recommended.
4.f Mostly real, industrial case studies were tested in PHM XAI – Increases the confidence of
PHM practitioner and end user in AI model’s adoption.
4.6.2. Limitations
4.g This review does not classify XAI methods in term of its nature : post-hoc, local or global
explainability – New insight or pattern could potentially be uncovered by applying this
categorization.
4.h This review does not assess the various definitions of interpretability and its derivations that
exist in PHM XAI works.
4.i The classification of performance in qualitative form (“good”, “very good”) dilutes the
information. A quantitative classification permits comparison especially when a common
dataset is used —e.g., turbofan simulated dataset. Investigation in term of PHM tasks or
type of reasoning —i.e., regression, classification, can also be done using quantitative
assessment.
5. CONCLUSION
In this work, a state-of-the-art systematic review on XAI applications linked to PHM of industrial
asset is compiled. The review follows the guidelines of PRISMA for best practice in systematic review
reporting. 35 peer reviewed articles, in English language, from 2015 to 2021, treating the concerned
subject were selected and examined to accomplish the review objectives. Several interesting findings
are uncovered. Firstly, this review finds that XAI is attracting interest in PHM domain, with a spike in
2020, though still in its infancy phase. Interpretable model, rule & knowledge based as well as attention
mechanism are the most widely used XAI techniques applied in PHM works. Secondly, XAI is central
to PHM, assimilated as a tool to execute PHM tasks by the majority of diagnostic and anomaly detection
works, while simultaneously being an instrument of explanation. Thirdly, it is found that PHM
performance is unaltered by XAI. As a matter of fact, the majority of PHM XAI works achieved
excellent performance. In general, the evaluated works show either good to excellent results. There is
however much work to be done in term of human participation, explainability metrics and uncertainty
management which are nearly missing. Finally, this review discovered that mostly real, industrial case
studies were tested to demonstrate the effectiveness of XAI, signifying the readiness of AI and XAI to
solve real, complex industrial challenges.
1
Table 1. Selected Articles According to Year
2
No
Authors &
Year
Title
Publisher &
Publication Name
PHM
Activity
XAI
Approach
Performance
XAI Assist
PHM
Metric
Human
Role
Uncertainty
Management
Case Study
1
[49] Wong et
al., 2015
On equivalence of FIS
and ELM for
interpretable rule-based
knowledge
representation
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Neural Networks
And Learning
Systems
Diagnostic
Rule &
Knowledge-
based
Good Yes No No No
Real –
Circulating
water system
2
[51] Wu et
al.,2018
K-PdM: KPI-Oriented
Machinery
Deterioration
Estimation Framework
for Predictive
Maintenance Using
Cluster-Based Hidden
Markov Model
IEEE, IEEE
Access
Prognostic
Rule &
Knowledge-
based
Very Good No No No
Probabilistic
state transition
model
Simulated –
Turbofan
Engine
3
[59] Massimo
et al., 2018
Unsupervised
classification of
multichannel profile
data using PCA: an
application to an
emission control system
Elsevier,
Computers &
Industrial
Engineering
Diagnostic
Cluster-
based
Very good Yes No Yes No
Real –
Emission
Control
System
4
[40] Mathias
et al, 2019
Forecasting remaining
useful life: interpretable
deep learning approach
via variational bayesian
inferences
Elsevier,
Decision Support
Systems
Prognostic
Interpretable
Model
Better than
other
methods,
except
LSTM
No No No
Uncertainty in
model
parameters
Simulated –
Turbofan
Engine
5
[48] Imene et
al., 2019
Fault isolation in
manufacturing systems
based on learning
algorithm and fuzzy
rule selection
Springer, Neural
Computing And
Applications
Diagnostic
Rule &
Knowledge-
based
Very good Yes No No
Probabilistic
classification
by Bayes
decision rule
Real –
Rotary Kiln
6
[52] Kerelous
et al., 2019
Interpretable logic tree
analysis: A data-driven
fault tree methodology
for causality analysis
Elsevier, Expert
Systems With
Applications
Diagnostic LAD Very Good Yes No Yes
FTA – Expert
opinion
Simulated –
Actuator
system
7
[53]
Rajendran et
al., 2019
Unsupervised Wireless
Spectrum Anomaly
Detection With
Interpretable Features
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Cognitive
Communications
And Networking
Anomaly
Detection Autoencoder
Generally
better than
other tested
methods
Yes No No
Probabilistic
classification
error by
discriminator
Real –
Software
Defined
Radio
Spectrum
Simulated –
Synthetic
Data
8
[60] Wang et
al., 2019
An Attention-
augmented Deep
Architecture for Hard
Drive Status Monitoring
in Large-scale Storage
Systems
ACM, ACM
Transactions On
Storage
Prognostic,
Diagnostic
Attention
Mechanism
Generally,
better than
other
methods in
prognostic.
No
comparison
in
diagnostic
Diagnostic
Yes
Prognostic
No
No No No
Real –
Hard drive
9
[69] Le et al.,
2019
Visualization and
explainable machine
learning for efficient
manufacturing and
system operations
ASTM, Smart
And Sustainable
Manufacturing
Systems
Diagnostic Others N/A1
Yes No Yes No
Simulated –
Turbofan
10
[38] Langone
et al., 2020
Interpretable Anomaly
Prediction: Predicting
anomalous behavior in
industry 4.0 settings via
regularized logistic
regression tools
Elsevier, Data &
Knowledge
Engineering
Anomaly
Detection
Interpretable
Model
Good Yes No No
Statistical
feature
extraction
Real –
High
pressure
plunger
pump
11
[39] Peng et
al., 2020
A dynamic structure-
adaptive symbolic
approach for slewing
bearings’ life prediction
under variable working
conditions
Sage, Structural
Health
Monitoring
Prognostic
Interpretable
Model
Better than
previous
methods
Yes No No No
Real –
Slewing
Bearings
12
[41] Ritto et
al., 2020
Digital twin, physics-
based model, and
machine learning
Elsevier,
Mechanical
Systems And
Signal Processing
Diagnostic
Interpretable
Model
Good No No No No
Not
specified –
1
N/A = Item not included in the studied work
applied to damage
detection in structures
Spring Mass
System
13
[42] Rea et
al., 2020
Progress toward
interpretable machine
learning based
disruption predictors
across tokamaks
Taylor & Francis,
Fusion Science
And Technology
Diagnostic
Interpretable
model
N/A No No No
Physic-based
indicator
Real DIII –
D and JET
Tokamaks
14
[43] Murari et
al., 2020
Investigating the
physics of tokamak
global stability with
interpretable machine
learning tools
MDPI, Applied
Sciences
Anomaly
Detection
Mathematic
equation
Good No No No No
Type
unspecified -
Tokamak
15
[44] Zhou et
al., 2020
Fault diagnosis of gas
turbine based on partly
interpretable
convolutional neural
networks
Elsevier, Energy Diagnostic Tree-Based
Better than
other tested
methods
Yes No No No
Simulated–
Gas Turbine
Model
16
[46] Zhou et
al., 2020
Addressing Noise and
Skewness in
Interpretable Health-
Condition Assessment
by Learning Model
Confidence
MDPI, Sensors Diagnostic
Rule &
Knowledge-
based
Good No No No No
Real –
Aircraft
structure
17
[47] Jianbo et
al., 2020
Knowledge extraction
and insertion to deep
belief network for
gearbox fault diagnosis
Elsevier,
Knowledge-Based
Systems
Diagnostic
Rule &
Knowledge-
based
Very Good Yes No No No
Real –
Gearbox
18
[50] Conde et
al., 2020
Isotonic boosting
classification rules
Springer,
Advances In Data
Analysis And
Classification
Diagnostic
Rule &
Knowledge-
based
Good and
comparable
to other
methods
Yes No No No
Real –
Induction
motor
19
[54] Antonio
et al., 2020
Using an autoencoder in
the design of an
anomaly detector for
smart manufacturing
Elsevier, Pattern
Recognition
Letters
Anomaly
Detection
Autoencoder
Same as the
previous
best method
Yes No No
No
Simulated –
Continuous
batch
washing
equipment
20
[55] Abid et
al., 2020
Robust interpretable
deep learning for
intelligent fault
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Diagnostic Filter-Based
Better than
other tested
methods and
Yes No No No
Real –
Electrical
and
diagnosis of induction
motors
Instrumentation
And Measurement
previous
works
mechanical
motor
21
[56] Liu et al.,
2020
Tscatnet: an
interpretable cross-
domain intelligent
diagnosis model with
antinoise and few-shot
learning capability
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Instrumentation
And Measurement
Diagnostic Filter-based
Better than
other tested
methods
Yes No No No
Real –
Bearing,
Drive train
22
[57] Li et al.,
2020
Waveletkernelnet: an
interpretable deep
neural network for
industrial intelligent
diagnosis.
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Systems, Man,
And Cybernetics:
Systems
Diagnostic Filter-based
Better than
other tested
methods
Yes No No No
Real –
Bearing,
Drive train
23
[61] Kim et
al., 2020
An explainable
convolutional neural
network for fault
diagnosis in linear
motion guide
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Industrial
Informatics
Diagnostic
Attention
Mechanism
Very good No No No No
Real –
Linear
motion guide
24
[62] Chen et
al., 2020
Vibration signals
analysis by explainable
artificial intelligence
(XAI) approach:
application on bearing
faults diagnosis
IEEE, IEEE
Access
Diagnostic
Attention
Mechanism
N/A No No No No
Real –
Rolling
Bearing
25
[63] Sun et
al., 2020
Vision-based fault
diagnostics using
explainable deep
learning with class
activation maps
IEEE, IEEE
Access
Diagnostic
Attention
Mechanism
Very Good No No No No
Real –
Base-excited
cantilever
beam, water
pump system
26
[64] Oh et al.,
2020
VODCA: Verification
of diagnosis using
CAM-based approach
for explainable process
monitoring
MDPI, Sensors Diagnostic
Attention
Mechanism
Good Yes No No
True Positive
(TP) and True
Negative (TN)
indicators
Simulated –
Ford motor
and Real –
Sapphire
grinding
27
[65] Sreenath
et al., 2020
Fouling modeling and
prediction approach for
heat exchangers using
deep learning
Elsevier,
International
Journal Of Heat
Failure
Prediction
Model
Agnostic
Very Good No No No No
Simulated –
Heat
Exchanger
Model
And Mass
Transfer
28
[66] Hong et
al., 2020
Remaining useful life
prognosis for turbofan
engine using
explainable deep neural
networks with
dimensionality
reduction
MDPI, Sensors Prognostic
Model
Agnostic
Very Good No No No No
Simulated –
Turbofan
Engine
29
[68] Grezmak
et al., 2020
Interpretable
Convolutional Neural
Network through
Layer-wise Relevance
Propagation for
Machine Fault
Diagnosis
IEEE,
IEEE Sensors
Journal
Diagnostic LRP Very Good No No No No
Real –
Induction
motor
30
[70] Ming et
al., 2020
ProtoSteer: Steering
Deep Sequence Model
with Prototypes
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Visualization And
Computer
Graphics
Diagnostic Others N/A Yes No Yes No
Real –
Vehicle fault
log
31
[72] Chen et
al., 2020
Frequency-temporal-
logic-based bearing
fault diagnosis and fault
interpretation using
Bayesian optimization
with Bayesian neural
networks
Elsevier,
Mechanical
Systems and
Signal Processing
Diagnostic Others
Better than
other tested
methods
Yes No No No
Real –
Bearings
32
[45]
Steenwinckel
et al., 2021
FLAGS: A
methodology for
adaptive anomaly
detection and root cause
analysis on sensor data
streams by fusing expert
knowledge with
machine learning
Elsevier, Future
Generation
Computer
Systems
Anomaly
Detection,
Diagnostic
Rule &
Knowledge-
based
Good in
anomaly
detection
No result for
diagnostic
Yes for both No Yes
FMEA & FTA
– Expert
opinion
Real – Train
33
[58] Zhang et
al., 2021
A New Interpretable
Learning Method for
Fault Diagnosis of
Rolling Bearings
IEEE, IEEE
Transactions On
Instrumentation
And Measurement
Diagnostic
Cluster-
based
Very Good Yes No No No
Real –
Rolling
bearing
34
[67] Onchis et
al., 2021
Stable and explainable
deep learning damage
prediction for prismatic
cantilever steel beam
Elsevier,
Computers In
Industry
Diagnostic
Model
Agnostic
Very good Yes
Stability-
fit
compens
ation
index
(SFC) -
Quality
indicator
of the
explanati
ons
No Yes
Real –
Prismatic
cantilever
steel beam
35
[71] Ding et
al., 2021
Stationary subspaces-
vector autoregressive
with exogenous terms
methodology for
degradation trend
estimation of rolling
and slewing bearings
Elsevier,
Mechanical
Systems And
Signal Processing
Prognostic Others
Better than
other tested
methods and
comparable
to previous
works
Yes No No No
Real –
Rolling and
slewing
bearings
3
Table 2. Excluded Articles According to Year
4
No. Authors, Date Title Publisher, Publication Name Exclusion Reason
1 [76] Kumar et al., 2016
Adaptive cluster tendency visualization and anomaly
detection for streaming data
ACM, ACM Transactions On Knowledge
Discovery From Data
Non PHM-XAI implementation/case study
2 [77] Bao et al., 2016
Improved fault detection and diagnosis using sparse
global-local preserving projections
Elsevier, Journal Of Process Control Process monitoring & anomaly detection
3 [78] Kozjek et al., 2017
Interpretative identification of the faulty conditions
in a cyclic manufacturing process
Elsevier, Journal Of Manufacturing Systems Process monitoring & diagnosis
4 [79] Ragab et al., 2017
Fault diagnosis in industrial chemical processes
using interpretable patterns based on logical analysis
of data
Elsevier, Expert Systems With Applications Process monitoring & fault diagnosis
5 [80] Tang et al., 2018
Fisher discriminative sparse representation based on
dbn for fault diagnosis of complex system
MDPI, Applied Science Process monitoring & fault diagnosis
6 [81] Luo et al., 2018
Knowledge-data-integrated sparse modeling for
batch process monitoring
Elsevier, Chemical Engineering Science Process anomaly detection & diagnosis
7 [82] Puggini et al., 2018
An enhanced variable selection and Isolation Forest
based methodology for anomaly detection with oes
data
Elsevier, Engineering Applications Of Artificial
Intelligence
Process anomaly detection & diagnosis
8 [83] Cheng et al., 2018
Monitoring influent measurements at water resource
recovery facility using data-driven soft sensor
approach
IEEE, IEEE Sensors Journal Process anomaly detection
9 [84] Zhang et al., 2018
Weakly correlated profile monitoring based on
sparse multi-channel functional principal component
analysis
T&F, IISE Transactions Process monitoring
10 [85] Luo et al., 2018
Industrial process monitoring based on knowledge-
data integrated sparse model and two-level deviation
magnitude plots
ACS, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
Research
Process monitoring, anomaly detection &
diagnosis
11 [86] Vojíř et al., 2018
EasyMiner.eu: web framework for interpretable
machine learning based on rules and frequent
itemsets
Elsevier, Knowledge-Based Systems
Only development version offers anomaly
detection
12 [87] Du et al., 2019
A condition change detection method for solar
conversion efficiency in solar cell manufacturing
processes
IEEE, IEEE Transactions On Semiconductor
Manufacturing
Process monitoring & anomaly detection
13 [88] Keneniet et al., 2019
Evolving rule-based explainable artificial
intelligence for unmanned aerial vehicles
IEEE, IEEE Access
Interpret why agent (UAV) deviate from its
mission, not because of system failure
14 [89] Wang et al., 2019
Dynamic soft sensor development based on
convolutional neural networks
ACS, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
Research
Process modelling
15 [90] Wang et al., 2019
Explicit and interpretable nonlinear soft sensor
models for influent surveillance at a full-scale
wastewater treatment plant
Elsevier, Journal Of Process Control Process monitoring & variable prediction
16 [91] Liu et al., 2019
Intelligent online catastrophe assessment and
preventive control via a stacked denoising
autoencoder
Elsevier, Neurocomputing Black Box
17 [92] Bukhsh et al., 2019
Predictive maintenance using tree-based
classification techniques: a case of railway switches
Elsevier, Transportation Research Part C
Predict maintenance need, activity type and
maintenance trigger status
18 [93] Ragab et al., 2019
Deep understanding in industrial processes by
complementing human expertise with interpretable
patterns of machine learning
Elsevier, Expert Systems With Applications Process monitoring & fault diagnosis
19 [94] Luo et al., 2019
Sparse robust principal component analysis with
applications to fault detection and diagnosis
ACS, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
Research
Process monitoring, fault detection &
diagnosis
20 [95] Jie et al., 2020
Process abnormity identification by fuzzy logic rules
and expert estimated thresholds derived certainty
factor
Elsevier, Chemometrics And Intelligent
Laboratory Systems
Process anomaly diagnosis
21 [96] Sajedi et al., 2020
Dual bayesian inference for risk-informed vibration-
based diagnosis
Wiley, Computer-Aided Civil And Infrastructure
Engineering
Uncertainty interpretation, not model's
interpretation
22 [97] Sun et al., 2020
ALVEN: algebraic learning via elastic net for static
and dynamic nonlinear model identification
Elsevier, Computers & Chemical Engineering Process monitoring & variable prediction
23
[98] Henriques et al.,
2020
Combining k-means and xgboost models for
anomaly detection using log datasets
MDPI, Electronics Anomaly in project, not engineered system
24
[99] Gorzałczany et al.,
2020
A modern data-mining approach based on
genetically optimized fuzzy systems for interpretable
and accurate smart-grid stability prediction
MDPI, Energies
Electrical grid demand stability in financial
perspective
25 [100] Müller et al., 2020
Data or interpretations impacts of information
presentation strategies on diagnostic processes
Wiley, Human Factors And Ergonomics In
Manufacturing & Service Industries
Experiment with operator effectivity
following quality of interpretability
26 [101] Shriram et al., 2020
Least squares sparse principal component analysis
and parallel coordinates for real-time process
monitoring
ACS, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
Research
Process monitoring & diagnosis
27
[102] Alshraideh et al.,
2020
Process control via random forest classification of
profile signals: an application to a tapping process
Elsevier, Journal Of Manufacturing Processes Process monitoring & anomaly detection
28
[103] Minghua et al.,
2020
Diagnosing root causes of intermittent slow queries
in cloud databases
ACM, Proceedings Of The VLDB Endowment
Diagnosing slow query due to lack of
resources, not failure
29 [104] Shaha et al., 2020
Performance prediction and interpretation of a refuse
plastic fuel fired boiler
IEEE, IEEE Access Performance prediction
30 [105] Kovalev et al., 2020
SurvLIME: a method for explaining machine
learning survival models
Elsevier, Knowledge-Based Systems Medical survival model
31 [106] Kovalev et al., 2020
A robust algorithm for explaining unreliable
machine learning survival models using the
kolmogorov–smirnov bounds
Elsevier, Neural Networks Medical survival model
32 [105] Karn et al., 2021
Cryptomining detection in container clouds using
system calls and explainable machine learning
IEEE, IEEE Transactions On Parallel And
Distributed Systems
Network attack
33 [106] Gyula et al., 2021
Decision trees for informative process alarm
definition and alarm-based fault classification
Elsevier, Process Safety And Environmental
Protection
Process monitoring & anomaly detection
34 [107] Zaman et al., 2021
Fuzzy heuristics and decision tree for classification
of statistical feature-based control chart patterns
MDPI, Symmetry Process monitoring & diagnosis
35 [108] Li et al., 2021
DTDR–ALSTM: extracting dynamic time-delays to
reconstruct multivariate data for improving
attention-based lstm industrial time series prediction
models
Elsevier, Knowledge-Based Systems Process monitoring & variable prediction
5
Database &
Date
Extracted
Paper
Qty
Search Field & Keywords
Filters
Applied
IEEE
Xplore
18/02/21
144
Using ‘Document Title’:
1. Document Title: explainable OR Document Title: interpretable, Search within results: diagnostic
2. Document Title: explainable OR Document Title: interpretable, Search within results: prognostic
3. Document Title: explainable OR Document Title: interpretable, Search within results: diagnosis
4. Document Title: explainable OR Document Title: interpretable, Search within results: prognosis
5. Document Title: explainable OR Document Title: interpretable, Search within results: anomaly detection
6. Document Title: explainable OR Document Title: interpretable, Search within results: RUL
7. Document Title: explainable OR Document Title: interpretable, Search within results: remaining useful life
8. Document Title: explainable AI OR Document Title: explainable machine learning OR Document Title: explainable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: prognostic
Journals,
Early Access
Article,
Specify Year
Range:
2015-2021
9. Document Title: explainable AI OR Document Title: explainable machine learning OR Document Title: explainable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: diagnostic
10. Document Title: explainable AI OR Document Title: explainable machine learning OR Document Title: explainable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: diagnosis
11. Document Title: explainable AI OR Document Title: explainable machine learning OR Document Title: explainable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: prognosis
12. Document Title: explainable AI OR Document Title: explainable machine learning OR Document Title: explainable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: anomaly detection
13. Document Title: explainable AI OR Document Title: explainable machine learning OR Document Title: explainable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: RUL
14. Document Title: explainable AI OR Document Title: explainable machine learning OR Document Title: explainable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: remaining useful life
15. Document Title: interpretable AI OR Document Title: interpretable machine learning OR Document Title: interpretable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: diagnostic
16. Document Title: interpretable AI OR Document Title: interpretable machine learning OR Document Title: interpretable deep learning OR
Document Title: XAI, Search within results: prognostic
17. Document Title: interpretable AI OR Document Title: interpretable machine learning) OR Document Title: interpretable deep learning
OR Document Title: XAI, Search within results: prognosis
18. Document Title: interpretable AI OR Document Title: interpretable machine learning) OR Document Title: interpretable deep learning
OR Document Title: XAI, Search within results: diagnosis
19. Document Title: interpretable AI OR Document Title: interpretable machine learning) OR Document Title: interpretable deep learning
OR Document Title: XAI, Search within results: anomaly detection
20. Document Title: interpretable AI OR Document Title: interpretable machine learning) OR Document Title: interpretable deep learning
OR Document Title: XAI, Search within results: RUL
21. Document Title: interpretable AI OR Document Title: interpretable machine learning) OR Document Title: interpretable deep learning
OR Document Title: XAI, Search within results: remaining useful life
Using ‘Abstract’:
22. Abstract: explainable AI OR Abstract: explainable machine learning OR Abstract: explainable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI
, Search within results: prognostic
23. Abstract: explainable AI OR Abstract: explainable machine learning OR Abstract: explainable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI
, Search within results: diagnostic
24. Abstract: explainable AI OR Abstract: explainable machine learning OR Abstract: explainable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI
, Search within results: diagnosis
25. Abstract: explainable AI OR Abstract: explainable machine learning OR Abstract: explainable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI
, Search within results: prognosis
26. Abstract: explainable AI OR Abstract: explainable machine learning OR Abstract: explainable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI
, Search within results: anomaly detection
27. Abstract: explainable AI OR Abstract: explainable machine learning OR Abstract: explainable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI
, Search within results: RUL
28. Abstract: explainable AI OR Abstract: explainable machine learning OR Abstract: explainable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI
, Search within results: remaining useful life
29. Abstract: interpretable AI OR Abstract: interpretable machine learning) OR Abstract: interpretable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI,
Search within results: prognostic
30. Abstract: interpretable AI OR Abstract: interpretable machine learning) OR Abstract: interpretable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI,
Search within results: diagnostic
31. Abstract: interpretable AI OR Abstract: interpretable machine learning) OR Abstract: interpretable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI,
Search within results: prognosis
32. Abstract: interpretable AI OR Abstract: interpretable machine learning) OR Abstract: interpretable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI,
Search within results: diagnosis
33. Abstract: interpretable AI OR Abstract: interpretable machine learning) OR Abstract: interpretable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI,
Search within results: anomaly detection
34. Abstract: interpretable AI OR Abstract: interpretable machine learning) OR Abstract: interpretable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI,
Search within results: RUL
35. Abstract: interpretable AI OR Abstract: interpretable machine learning) OR Abstract: interpretable deep learning OR Abstract: XAI,
Search within results: remaining useful life
Science
Direct
17/02/21
607
Using ‘Title, abstract or author-specified keywords’:
36. ("explainable" OR "interpretable") AND ("prognostic" OR "diagnostic" OR "prognosis" OR "diagnosis" OR "anomaly detection" OR "RUL"
OR "remaining useful life")
37. ("explainable AI" OR "explainable machine learning" OR "explainable deep learning" OR "XAI") AND ("prognostic" OR "diagnostic" OR
"anomaly detection" OR "RUL" OR "remaining useful life")
38. ("explainable AI" OR "explainable machine learning" OR "explainable deep learning" OR "XAI") AND ("prognosis" OR "diagnosis" OR
"anomaly detection" OR "RUL" OR "remaining useful life")
39. ("interpretable AI" OR "interpretable machine learning" OR "interpretable deep learning" OR "XAI") AND ("prognostic" OR "diagnostic"
OR "anomaly detection" OR "RUL" OR "remaining useful life")
40. ("interpretable AI" OR "interpretable machine learning" OR "interpretable deep learning" OR "XAI") AND ("prognosis" OR "diagnosis" OR
"anomaly detection" OR "RUL" OR "remaining useful life")
Article type:
Research
Articles,
Subject
areas:
Engineering &
Computer
Science,
Year(s): 2015-
2021
Springer
Link
22/02/21
291
Using ‘With all the words’:
41. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "prognos"
42. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "prognos"
43. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "diagnos"
44. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "diagnos"
45. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "RUL"'
46. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "RUL"
47. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "remaining useful life"
48. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "remaining useful life"
49. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "anomaly detection"
50. "explainable" OR "interpretable" AND "anomaly detection"
Content
Type: Article,
Discipline:
Computer
Science or
Engineering,
Language:
English,
Show
documents
published:
2015-2021
ACM
Digital
Library
75
Using ‘Publication Title, Abstract & Keywords’:
51. Publication Title: explainable or interpretable AND Publication Title: (prognos OR diagnos OR "anomaly detection" OR RUL OR
"remaining useful life"
Publications:
Journal,
Content
28/05/21 52. Abstract: explainable or interpretable AND Abstract: (prognos OR diagnos OR "anomaly detection" OR RUL OR "remaining useful
life"
53. Keywords: explainable or interpretable AND Keywords: (prognos OR diagnos OR "anomaly detection" OR RUL OR "remaining useful
life"
Type:
Research
Article,
Publication
Date:
2015-2021
Scopus
27/02/21
1931
54. (“explainable" OR "interpretable") AND (“prognostic” OR “diagnostic” OR "prognosis” OR "diagnosis” OR “anomaly detection” OR
“RUL” OR “remaining useful life" )
Limit to:
Document
type: Article,
Publication
stage: Final,
Subject
Area:
Engineering &
Computer
Science,
Language:
English,
Exclude:
Medical,
Published
from:
2015-2021
6
AKNOWLEDGEMENT
7
This work is financed by Universiti Teknologi Petronas Foundation.
8
DECLARATION OF COMPETING INTEREST
9
The authors declare that they have no known competing interest in any form that could influence the work.
10
11
References
12
1. Peter Stone, Rodney Brooks, Erik Brynjolfsson, Ryan Calo, Oren Etzioni, Greg Hager, Julia
13
Hirschberg, Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan, Ece Kamar, Sarit Kraus, Kevin Leyton-Brown, David
14
Parkes, William Press, AnnaLee Saxenian, Julie Shah, Milind Tambe, and Astro
15
Teller. "Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030." One Hundred Year Study on Artificial
16
Intelligence: Report of the 2015-2016 Study Panel, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
17
September 2016. Doc: http://ai100.stanford.edu/2016-report. Accessed: September 6, 2016.
18
2. Bughin, J., Eric Hazan, S. Ramaswamy, Michael Chui, Tera Allas, Peter Dahlstrom, Nicolaus
19
Henke and Monica Trench. “Artificial intelligence: the next digital frontier?” (2017).
20
3. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU), (2018), Assessing the Economic Impact of
21
Artificial Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence in Service of Business: Creating a Competitive
22
Advantage, St. Petersburg International Economic Forum 2018
23
4. Ernst, Ekkehard & Merola, Rossana & Samaan, Daniel. (2018). The economics of artificial
24
intelligence: Implications for the future of work. 10.13140/RG.2.2.29802.57283.
25
5. Rigla M, García-Sáez G, Pons B, Hernando ME. Artificial Intelligence Methodologies and
26
Their Application to Diabetes. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2018 Mar;12(2):303-310. doi:
27
10.1177/1932296817710475. Epub 2017 May 25. PMID: 28539087; PMCID: PMC5851211.
28
6. Zhang, Xin & Dahu, Wang. (2019). Application of Artificial Intelligence Algorithms in Image
29
Processing. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation. 61.
30
10.1016/j.jvcir.2019.03.004.
31
7. Xu, Zhaoyi & Saleh, Joseph. (2020). Machine Learning for Reliability Engineering and Safety
32
Applications: Review of Current Status and Future Opportunities.
33
8. Voulodimos, Athanasios & Doulamis, Nikolaos & Doulamis, Anastasios & Protopapadakis,
34
Eftychios. (2018). Deep Learning for Computer Vision: A Brief Review. Computational
35
Intelligence and Neuroscience. 2018. 1-13. 10.1155/2018/7068349.
36
9. Linardatos, P.; Papastefanopoulos, V.; Kotsiantis, S. Explainable AI: A Review of Machine
37
Learning Interpretability Methods. Entropy 2021, 23, 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23010018
38
10. S. Zhang, S. Zhang, B. Wang and T. G. Habetler, "Deep Learning Algorithms for Bearing Fault
39
Diagnostics—A Comprehensive Review," in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 29857-29881, 2020, doi:
40
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2972859.
41
11. S. Lu, H. Chai, A. Sahoo and B. T. Phung, "Condition Monitoring Based on Partial Discharge
42
Diagnostics Using Machine Learning Methods: A Comprehensive State-of-the-Art Review," in
43
IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1861-1888,
44
December 2020, doi: 10.1109/TDEI.2020.009070.
45
12. A. L. Ellefsen, V. Æsøy, S. Ushakov and H. Zhang, "A Comprehensive Survey of Prognostics
46
and Health Management Based on Deep Learning for Autonomous Ships," in IEEE
47
Transactions on Reliability, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 720-740, June 2019, doi:
48
10.1109/TR.2019.2907402.
49
13. J. W. Sheppard, M. A. Kaufman and T. J. Wilmer, "IEEE Standards for Prognostics and Health
50
Management," in IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 34-41,
51
Sept. 2009, doi: 10.1109/MAES.2009.5282287.
52
14. J. Zhou, L. Zheng, Y. Wang and C. Gogu, "A Multistage Deep Transfer Learning Method for
53
Machinery Fault Diagnostics Across Diverse Working Conditions and Devices," in IEEE
54
Access, vol. 8, pp. 80879-80898, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2990739.
55
15. Khan, S. and Yairi, T., “A review on the application of deep learning in system health
56
management”, <i>Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing</i>, vol. 107, pp. 241–265,
57
2018. doi:10.1016/j.ymssp.2017.11.024.
58
16. G. Aydemir and K. Paynabar, "Image-Based Prognostics Using Deep Learning Approach," in
59
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 5956-5964, Sept. 2020, doi:
60
10.1109/TII.2019.2956220.
61
17. J. J. A. Costello, G. M. West and S. D. J. McArthur, "Machine Learning Model for Event-Based
62
Prognostics in Gas Circulator Condition Monitoring," in IEEE Transactions on Reliability, vol.
63
66, no. 4, pp. 1048-1057, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TR.2017.2727489.
64
18. C. Yang, B. Gunay, Z. Shi and W. Shen, "Machine Learning-Based Prognostics for Central
65
Heating and Cooling Plant Equipment Health Monitoring," in IEEE Transactions on
66
Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 346-355, Jan. 2021, doi:
67
10.1109/TASE.2020.2998586.
68
19. S. -K. S. Fan, C. -Y. Hsu, D. -M. Tsai, F. He and C. -C. Cheng, "Data-Driven Approach for
69
Fault Detection and Diagnostic in Semiconductor Manufacturing," in IEEE Transactions on
70
Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1925-1936, Oct. 2020, doi:
71
10.1109/TASE.2020.2983061.
72
20. X. Li, W. Zhang, N. Xu and Q. Ding, "Deep Learning-Based Machinery Fault Diagnostics With
73
Domain Adaptation Across Sensors at Different Places," in IEEE Transactions on Industrial
74
Electronics, vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 6785-6794, Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TIE.2019.2935987.
75
21. Q. Yang, X. Jia, X. Li, J. Feng, W. Li and J. Lee, "Evaluating Feature Selection and Anomaly
76
Detection Methods of Hard Drive Failure Prediction," in IEEE Transactions on Reliability, vol.
77
70, no. 2, pp. 749-760, June 2021, doi: 10.1109/TR.2020.2995724.
78
22. Tosun AB, Pullara F, Becich MJ, Taylor DL, Fine JL, Chennubhotla SC. Explainable AI (xAI)
79
for Anatomic Pathology. Adv Anat Pathol. 2020 Jul;27(4):241-250. doi:
80
10.1097/PAP.0000000000000264. PMID: 32541594.
81
23. Taylor, J.E.T., Taylor, G.W. Artificial cognition: How experimental psychology can help
82
generate explainable artificial intelligence. Psychon Bull Rev 28, 454–475 (2021).
83
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-020-01825-5
84
24. Markus, Aniek & Kors, Jan & Rijnbeek, Peter. (2020). The role of explainability in creating
85
trustworthy artificial intelligence for health care: a comprehensive survey of the terminology,
86
design choices, and evaluation strategies.
87
25. Jiménez-Luna, J., Grisoni, F. & Schneider, G. Drug discovery with explainable artificial
88
intelligence. Nat Mach Intell 2, 573–584 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-00236-4
89
26. Alejandro Barredo Arrieta, Natalia Díaz-Rodríguez, Javier Del Ser, Adrien Bennetot, Siham
90
Tabik, Alberto Barbado, Salvador Garcia, Sergio Gil-Lopez, Daniel Molina, Richard
91
Benjamins, Raja Chatila, Francisco Herrera, Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI):
92
Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI, Information
93
Fusion, Volume 58, 2020, Pages 82-115, ISSN 1566-2535,
94
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2019.12.012.
95
27. Payrovnaziri SN, Chen Z, Rengifo-Moreno P, Miller T, Bian J, Chen JH, Liu X, He Z.
96
Explainable artificial intelligence models using real-world electronic health record data: a
97
systematic scoping review. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jul 1;27(7):1173-1185. doi:
98
10.1093/jamia/ocaa053. PMID: 32417928; PMCID: PMC7647281.
99
28. Stepin, Ilia & Alonso, Jose & Catala, Alejandro & Pereira-Farina, Martin. (2021). A Survey of
100
Contrastive and Counterfactual Explanation Generation Methods for Explainable Artificial
101
Intelligence. IEEE Access. 9. 11974-12001. 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3051315.
102
29. Bussmann, Niklas & Giudici, Paolo & Marinelli, Dimitri & Papenbrock, Jochen. (2020).
103
Explainable AI in Fintech Risk Management. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence. 3.
104
10.3389/frai.2020.00026.
105
30. Tjoa E, Guan C. A Survey on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): Toward Medical XAI.
106
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems. 2020 Oct;PP. DOI:
107
10.1109/tnnls.2020.3027314.
108
31. Streich, Jared & Romero, Jonathon & Gazolla, João & Kainer, David & Cliff, Ashley & Prates,
109
Erica & Brown, James & Khoury, Sacha & Tuskan, Gerald & Garvin, Michael & Jacobson,
110
Dan & Harfouche, Antoine. (2020). Can exascale computing and explainable artificial
111
intelligence applied to plant biology deliver on the United Nations sustainable development
112
goals?. Current Opinion in Biotechnology. 61. 217-225. 10.1016/j.copbio.2020.01.010.
113
32. Adadi, Amina & Berrada, Mohammed. (2018). Peeking Inside the Black-Box: A Survey on
114
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access. PP. 1-1.
115
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2870052.
116
33. Chen, Kexin et al. “Neurorobots as a Means Toward Neuroethology and Explainable AI.”
117
Frontiers in neurorobotics vol. 14 570308. 19 Oct. 2020, doi:10.3389/fnbot.2020.570308
118
34. Xu, Feiyu & Uszkoreit, Hans & Du, Yangzhou & Fan, Wei & Zhao, Dongyan & Zhu, Jun.
119
(2019). Explainable AI: A Brief Survey on History, Research Areas, Approaches and
120
Challenges. 10.1007/978-3-030-32236-6_51.
121
35. Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The
122
PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. PLOS
123
Medicine 2021;18(3):e1003583. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003583
124
36. Xing, Meng & Yan, Xiaoning & Sun, Xiaoying & Wang, Shoumei & Zhou, Mi & Zhu, Bo &
125
Kuai, Le & Liu, Liu & Luo, Ying & Li, Xin & Li, Bin. (2019). Fire needle therapy for moderate-
126
severe acne: A PRISMA systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
127
Complementary Therapies in Medicine. 44. 10.1016/j.ctim.2019.04.009.
128
37. Li, Ting & Hua, Fang & Dan, Shiqi & Zhong, Yuxin & Levey, Colin & Song, Yaling. (2020).
129
Reporting quality of systematic review abstracts in operative dentistry: An assessment using
130
the PRISMA for Abstracts guidelines. Journal of dentistry. 102. 103471.
131
10.1016/j.jdent.2020.103471.
132
38. Langone, Rocco & Cuzzocrea, Alfredo & Skantzos, Nikolaos. (2020). Interpretable Anomaly
133
Prediction: Predicting anomalous behavior in industry 4.0 settings via regularized logistic
134
regression tools. Data & Knowledge Engineering. 130. 101850. 10.1016/j.datak.2020.101850.
135
39. Ding, Peng & Jia, Minping & Wang, Hua. (2020). A dynamic structure-adaptive symbolic
136
approach for slewing bearings’ life prediction under variable working conditions. Structural
137
Health Monitoring. 20. 10.1177/1475921720929939.
138
40. Kraus, Mathias & Feuerriegel, Stefan. (2019). Forecasting remaining useful life: Interpretable
139
deep learning approach via variational Bayesian inferences. Decision Support Systems. 125.
140
113100. 10.1016/j.dss.2019.113100.
141
41. Ritto, T.G. & Rochinha, Fernando. (2020). Digital twin, physics-based model, and machine
142
learning applied to damage detection in structures.
143
42. Rea, C & Montes, K & Pau, Alessandro & Granetz, R & Sauter, O.. (2020). Progress Toward
144
Interpretable Machine Learning- Based Disruption Predictors Across Tokamaks Progress
145
Toward Interpretable Machine Learning-Based Disruption Predictors Across Tokamaks.
146
Fusion Science and Technology. 76. 10.1080/15361055.2020.1798589.
147
43. Murari A, Peluso E, Lungaroni M, Rossi R, Gelfusa M, Contributors J. Investigating the
148
Physics of Tokamak Global Stability with Interpretable Machine Learning Tools. Applied
149
Sciences. 2020; 10(19):6683. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10196683
150
44. Dengji Zhou, Qinbo Yao, Hang Wu, Shixi Ma, Huisheng Zhang, Fault diagnosis of gas turbine
151
based on partly interpretable convolutional neural networks, Energy, Volume 200, 2020,
152
117467, ISSN 0360-5442, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117467.
153
45. Bram Steenwinckel, Dieter De Paepe, Sander Vanden Hautte, Pieter Heyvaert, Mohamed
154
Bentefrit, Pieter Moens, Anastasia Dimou, Bruno Van Den Bossche, Filip De Turck, Sofie Van
155
Hoecke, Femke Ongenae, FLAGS: A methodology for adaptive anomaly detection and root
156
cause analysis on sensor data streams by fusing expert knowledge with machine learning,
157
Future Generation Computer Systems, Volume 116, 2021, Pages 30-48, ISSN 0167-739X,
158
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2020.10.015.
159
46. Zhou Y, Hong S, Shang J, Wu M, Wang Q, Li H, Xie J. Addressing Noise and Skewness in
160
Interpretable Health-Condition Assessment by Learning Model Confidence. Sensors. 2020;
161
20(24):7307. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20247307
162
47. Yu, Jianbo & Liu, Guoliang. (2020). Knowledge extraction and insertion to deep belief network
163
for gearbox fault diagnosis. Knowledge-Based Systems. 197. 105883.
164
10.1016/j.knosys.2020.105883.
165
48. Djelloul, Imene & Sari, Zaki & Souier, Mehdi. (2019). Fault isolation in manufacturing systems
166
based on learning algorithm and fuzzy rule selection. Neural Computing and Applications. 31.
167
10.1007/s00521-017-3169-3.
168
49. S. Y. Wong, K. S. Yap, H. J. Yap, S. C. Tan and S. W.
169
Chang, "On Equivalence of FIS and ELM for Interpretable Rule-Based Knowledge
170
Representation," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 26, no.
171
7, pp. 1417-1430, July 2015, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2014.2341655.
172
50. Conde, D., Fernández, M.A., Rueda, C. et al. Isotonic boosting classification rules. Adv Data
173
Anal Classif 15, 289–313 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11634-020-00404-9
174
51. Z. Wu et al., "K-PdM: KPI-Oriented Machinery Deterioration Estimation Framework for
175
Predictive Maintenance Using Cluster-Based Hidden Markov Model," in IEEE Access, vol. 6,
176
pp. 41676-41687, 2018, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2859922.
177
52. Waghen, Kerelous & Ouali, Mohamed-Salah. (2019). Interpretable Logic Tree Analysis: A
178
Data-Driven Fault Tree Methodology for Causality Analysis. Expert Systems with
179
Applications. 136. 10.1016/j.eswa.2019.06.042.
180
53. S. Rajendran, W. Meert, V. Lenders and S. Pollin, "Unsupervised Wireless Spectrum Anomaly
181
Detection With Interpretable Features," in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications
182
and Networking, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 637-647, Sept. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TCCN.2019.2911524.
183
54. Antonio L. Alfeo, Mario G.C.A. Cimino, Giuseppe Manco, Ettore Ritacco, Gigliola Vaglini,
184
Using an autoencoder in the design of an anomaly detector for smart manufacturing, Pattern
185
Recognition Letters, Volume 136, 2020, Pages 272-278, ISSN 0167-8655,
186
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2020.06.008.
187
55. F. B. Abid, M. Sallem and A. Braham, "Robust Interpretable Deep Learning for Intelligent
188
Fault Diagnosis of Induction Motors," in IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
189
Measurement, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 3506-3515, June 2020, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2019.2932162.
190
56. C. Liu, C. Qin, X. Shi, Z. Wang, G. Zhang and Y. Han, "TScatNet: An Interpretable Cross-
191
Domain Intelligent Diagnosis Model With Antinoise and Few-Shot Learning Capability," in
192
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 70, pp. 1-10, 2021, Art no.
193
3506110, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2020.3041905.
194
57. T. Li et al., "WaveletKernelNet: An Interpretable Deep Neural Network for Industrial
195
Intelligent Diagnosis," in IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, doi:
196
10.1109/TSMC.2020.3048950.
197
58. D. Zhang, Y. Chen, F. Guo, H. R. Karimi, H. Dong and Q. Xuan, "A New Interpretable
198
Learning Method for Fault Diagnosis of Rolling Bearings," in IEEE Transactions on
199
Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 70, pp. 1-10, 2021, Art no. 3507010, doi:
200
10.1109/TIM.2020.3043873.
201
59. Pacella, Massimo. (2018). Unsupervised
202
Classification of Multichannel Profile Data using PCA: an application to an Emission Control
203
System. Computers & Industrial Engineering. 122. 10.1016/j.cie.2018.05.029.
204
60. Ji Wang, Weidong Bao, Lei Zheng, Xiaomin Zhu, and Philip S. Yu. 2019. An Attention-
205
augmented Deep Architecture for Hard Drive Status Monitoring in Large-scale Storage
206
Systems. ACM Trans. Storage 15, 3, Article 21 (August 2019), 26 pages.
207
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3340290
208
61. M. S. Kim, J. P. Yun and P. Park, "An Explainable Convolutional Neural Network for Fault
209
Diagnosis in Linear Motion Guide," in IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, doi:
210
10.1109/TII.2020.3012989.
211
62. H. -Y. Chen and C. -H. Lee, "Vibration Signals Analysis by Explainable Artificial Intelligence
212
(XAI) Approach: Application on Bearing Faults Diagnosis," in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
213
134246-134256, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3006491.
214
63. K. H. Sun, H. Huh, B. A. Tama, S. Y. Lee, J. H. Jung and S. Lee, "Vision-Based Fault
215
Diagnostics Using Explainable Deep Learning With Class Activation Maps," in IEEE Access,
216
vol. 8, pp. 129169-129179, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3009852.
217
64. Oh, C.; Jeong, J. VODCA: Verification of
218
Diagnosis Using CAM-Based Approach for Explainable Process Monitoring. Sensors 2020,
219
20, 6858. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20236858
220
65. Sundar, Sreenath & C. Rajagopal, Manjunath & Zhao, Hanyang & Kuntumalla, Gowtham &
221
Meng, Yuquan & Chang, Ho & Shao, Chenhui & Ferreira, Placid & Miljkovic, Nenad & Sinha,
222
Sanjiv & Salapaka, Srinivasa. (2020). Fouling modeling and prediction approach for heat
223
exchangers using deep learning. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 159. 120112.
224
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120112.
225
66. Hong CW, Lee C, Lee K, Ko M-S, Kim DE, Hur K. Remaining Useful Life Prognosis for
226
Turbofan Engine Using Explainable Deep Neural Networks with Dimensionality Reduction.
227
Sensors. 2020; 20(22):6626. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20226626
228
67. Onchis, Darian & Gillich, Gilbert-Rainer. (2021).
229
Stable and explainable deep learning damage prediction for prismatic cantilever steel beam.
230
Computers in Industry. 125. 103359. 10.1016/j.compind.2020.103359.
231
68. J. Grezmak, J. Zhang, P. Wang, K. A. Loparo and R. X. Gao, "Interpretable Convolutional
232
Neural Network Through Layer-wise Relevance Propagation for Machine Fault Diagnosis," in
233
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 3172-3181, 15 March15, 2020, doi:
234
10.1109/JSEN.2019.2958787.
235
69. Le, Dy & Vung, Pham & Nguyen, Huyen & Dang, Tommy. (2019). Visualization and
236
Explainable Machine Learning for Efficient Manufacturing and System Operations. 3.
237
20190029. 10.1520/SSMS20190029.
238
70. Y. Ming, P. Xu, F. Cheng, H. Qu and L. Ren, "ProtoSteer: Steering Deep Sequence Model with
239
Prototypes," in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.
240
238-248, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934267.
241
71. Peng Ding, Minping Jia, Xiaoan Yan, Stationary subspaces-vector autoregressive with
242
exogenous terms methodology for degradation trend estimation of rolling and slewing bearings,
243
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, Volume 150, 2021, 107293, ISSN 0888-3270,
244
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.107293.
245
72. Chen, Gang & Liu, Mei & Chen, Jin. (2020). Frequency-temporal-logic-based bearing fault
246
diagnosis and fault interpretation using Bayesian optimization with Bayesian neural networks.
247
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing. 145. 106951. 10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.106951.
248
73. Zhou J, Gandomi AH, Chen F, Holzinger A. Evaluating the Quality of Machine Learning
249
Explanations: A Survey on Methods and Metrics. Electronics. 2021; 10(5):593.
250
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10050593
251
74. Martin, K., Liret, A., Wiratunga, N. et al. Evaluating Explainability Methods Intended for
252
Multiple Stakeholders. Künstl Intell (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218-020-00702-6
253
75. Holzinger, A., Carrington, A. & Müller, H. Measuring the Quality of Explanations: The System
254
Causability Scale (SCS). Künstl Intell 34, 193–198 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218-
255
020-00636-z
256
EXCLUDED ARTICLES
257
76. Kumar, Dheeraj & Bezdek, James & Rajasegarar, Sutharshan & Palaniswami, Marimuthu &
258
Leckie, Christopher & Chan, Jeffrey & Gubbi, Jayavardhana. (2016). Adaptive Cluster
259
Tendency Visualization and Anomaly Detection for Streaming Data. ACM Transactions on
260
Knowledge Discovery from Data. 11. 1-40. 10.1145/2997656.
261
77. Bao, Shiyi & Luo, Lijia & Mao, Jianfeng. (2016). Improved fault detection and diagnosis using
262
sparse global-local preserving projections. Journal of Process Control. 47.
263
10.1016/j.jprocont.2016.09.007.
264
78. Kozjek, Dominik & Vrabič, Rok & Kralj, David & Butala, Peter. (2017). Interpretative
265
identification of the faulty conditions in a cyclic manufacturing process. Journal of
266
Manufacturing Systems. 43. 10.1016/j.jmsy.2017.03.001.
267
79. Ragab, Ahmed & El Koujok, Mohamed & Poulin, Bruno & Amazouz, Mouloud & Yacout,
268
Soumaya. (2017). Fault Diagnosis in Industrial Chemical Processes Using Interpretable
269
Patterns Based on Logical Analysis of Data. Expert Systems with Applications. 95.
270
10.1016/j.eswa.2017.11.045.
271
80. Tang Q, Chai Y, Qu J, Ren H. Fisher Discriminative Sparse Representation Based on DBN for
272
Fault Diagnosis of Complex System. Applied Sciences. 2018; 8(5):795.
273
https://doi.org/10.3390/app8050795
274
81. Luo, Lijia & Bao, Shiyi. (2018). Knowledge-data-integrated sparse modeling for batch process
275
monitoring. Chemical Engineering Science. 189. 10.1016/j.ces.2018.05.055.
276
82. Puggini, Luca & Mcloone, Sean. (2018). An enhanced variable selection and Isolation Forest
277
based methodology for anomaly detection with OES data. Engineering Applications of
278
Artificial Intelligence. 67. 126-135. 10.1016/j.engappai.2017.09.021.
279
83. Cheng, Tuoyuan & Harrou, Fouzi & Sun, Ying & Leiknes, Torove. (2018). Monitoring Influent
280
Measurements at Water Resource Recovery Facility Using Data-Driven Soft Sensor Approach.
281
IEEE Sensors Journal. PP. 1-1. 10.1109/JSEN.2018.2875954.
282
84. Zhang, Chen & Yan, Hao & Lee, Seungho & Shi, Jianjun. (2018). Weakly Correlated Profile
283
Monitoring Based on Sparse Multi-channel Functional Principal Component Analysis. IISE
284
Transactions. 50. 1-29. 10.1080/24725854.2018.1451012.
285
85. Industrial Process Monitoring Based on Knowledge–Data Integrated Sparse Model and Two-
286
Level Deviation Magnitude Plots, Lijia Luo, Shiyi Bao, Jianfeng Mao, and Zhenyu Ding,
287
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2018 57 (2), 611-622, DOI:
288
10.1021/acs.iecr.7b02150
289
86. Vojíř, Stanislav & Zeman, Václav & Kuchař, Jaroslav & Kliegr, Tomáš. (2018). EasyMiner.eu:
290
Web Framework for Interpretable Machine Learning based on Rules and Frequent Itemsets.
291
Knowledge-Based Systems. 150. 10.1016/j.knosys.2018.03.006.
292
87. J. Du, X. Zhang and J. Shi, "A Condition Change Detection Method for Solar Conversion
293
Efficiency in Solar Cell Manufacturing Processes," in IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor
294
Manufacturing, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 82-92, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TSM.2018.2875011.
295
88. B. M. Keneni et al., "Evolving Rule-Based Explainable Artificial Intelligence for Unmanned
296
Aerial Vehicles," in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 17001-17016, 2019, doi:
297
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2893141.
298
89. "Dynamic Soft Sensor Development Based on Convolutional Neural Networks”, Kangcheng
299
Wang, Chao Shang, Lei Liu, Yongheng Jiang, Dexian Huang, and Fan Yang, Industrial &
300
Engineering Chemistry Research, 2019 58 (26), 11521-11531 DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.9b02513
301
90. Wang, Xiaodong & Kvaal, Knut & Ratnaweera, Harsha. (2019). Explicit and interpretable
302
nonlinear soft sensor models for influent surveillance at a full-scale wastewater treatment plant.
303
Journal of Process Control. 77. 1-6. 10.1016/j.jprocont.2019.03.005.
304
91. Liu, Yangyang & Zhai, Mingyu & Jin, Jiahui & Song, Aibo & Lin, Jikeng & Wu, Zhiang &
305
Zhao, Yixin. (2019). Intelligent Online Catastrophe Assessment and Preventive Control via a
306
Stacked Denoising Autoencoder. Neurocomputing. 380. 10.1016/j.neucom.2019.10.090.
307
92. Bukhsh, Zaharah & Saeed, Aaqib & Stipanovic, Irina & Dorée, André. (2019). Predictive
308
maintenance using tree-based classification techniques: A case of railway switches.
309
Transportation Research Part C Emerging Technologies. 101. 35-54.
310
10.1016/j.trc.2019.02.001.
311
93. Ragab, Ahmed & El Koujok, Mohamed & Ghezzaz, Hakim & Amazouz, Mouloud & Ouali,
312
Mohamed-Salah & Yacout, Soumaya. (2019). Deep Understanding in Industrial Processes by
313
Complementing Human Expertise with Interpretable Patterns of Machine Learning. Expert
314
Systems with Applications. 10.1016/j.eswa.2019.01.011.
315
94. "Sparse Robust Principal Component Analysis with Applications to Fault Detection and
316
Diagnosis”, Lijia Luo, Shiyi Bao, and Chudong Tong, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
317
Research 2019 58 (3), 1300-1309, DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.8b04655"
318
95. jie, Yuan & shumei, Zhang & shu, Wang & fuli, Wang & luping, Zhao. (2020). Process
319
abnormity identification by fuzzy logic rules and expert estimated thresholds derived certainty
320
factor. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems. 209. 104232.
321
10.1016/j.chemolab.2020.104232.
322
96. Sajedi, S, Liang, X. Dual Bayesian inference for risk-informed vibration-based damage
323
diagnosis. Comput Aided Civ Inf. 2020; 1– 17. https://doi.org/10.1111/mice.12642
324
97. Sun, Weike & Braatz, Richard. (2020). ALVEN: Algebraic learning via elastic net for static
325
and dynamic nonlinear model identification. Computers & Chemical Engineering. 143.
326
107103. 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2020.107103.
327
98. Henriques J, Caldeira F, Cruz T, Simões P. Combining K-Means and XGBoost Models for
328
Anomaly Detection Using Log Datasets. Electronics. 2020; 9(7):1164.
329
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics9071164
330
99. Gorzałczany MB, Piekoszewski J, Rudziński F. A Modern Data-Mining Approach Based on
331
Genetically Optimized Fuzzy Systems for Interpretable and Accurate Smart-Grid Stability
332
Prediction. Energies. 2020; 13(10):2559. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13102559
333
100. Müller, R, Gögel, C, Bönsel, R. Data or interpretations: Impacts of information presentation
334
strategies on diagnostic processes. Hum Factors Man. 2020; 30: 266– 281.
335
https://doi.org/10.1002/hfm.20838
336
101. Least squares sparse principal component analysis and parallel coordinates for real-time
337
process monitoring, Shriram Gajjar, Murat Kulahci, and Ahmet Palazoglu, Industrial &
338
Engineering Chemistry Research 2020 59 (35), 15656-15670, DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.0c01749
339
102. Alshraideh, Hussam & del Castillo, Enrique & Gil Del Val, Alain. (2020). Process control via
340
random forest classification of profile signals: An application to a tapping process. Journal of
341
Manufacturing Processes. 58. 736-748. 10.1016/j.jmapro.2020.08.043.
342
103. Minghua Ma, Zheng Yin, Shenglin Zhang, Sheng Wang, Christopher Zheng, Xinhao Jiang,
343
Hanwen Hu, Cheng Luo, Yilin Li, Nengjun Qiu, Feifei Li, Changcheng Chen, and Dan Pei.
344
2020. Diagnosing root causes of intermittent slow queries in cloud databases. Proc. VLDB
345
Endow. 13, 8 (April 2020), 1176–1189. DOI:https://doi.org/10.14778/3389133.3389136
346
104. P. Shaha, M. S. Singamsetti, B. K. Tripathy, G. Srivastava, M. Bilal and L. Nkenyereye,
347
"Performance Prediction and Interpretation of a Refuse Plastic Fuel Fired Boiler," in IEEE
348
Access, vol. 8, pp. 117467-117482, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3004156.
349
105. Maxim S. Kovalev, Lev V. Utkin, Ernest M. Kasimov, SurvLIME: A method for explaining
350
machine learning survival models, Knowledge-Based Systems, Volume 203, 2020, 106164,
351
ISSN 0950-7051, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106164."
352
106. Kovalev, Maxim & Utkin, Lev. (2020). A robust algorithm for explaining unreliable machine
353
learning survival models using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov bounds.
354
107. R. R. Karn, P. Kudva, H. Huang, S. Suneja and I. M. Elfadel, "Cryptomining Detection in
355
Container Clouds Using System Calls and Explainable Machine Learning," in IEEE
356
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 674-691, 1 March 2021,
357
doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2020.3029088.
358
108. "Gyula Dorgo, Ahmet Palazoglu, Janos Abonyi, Decision trees for informative process alarm
359
definition and alarm-based fault classification, Process Safety and Environmental Protection,
360
Volume 149, 2021, Pages 312-324, ISSN 0957-5820,
361
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2020.10.024."
362
109. Zaman, Munawar & Hassan, Adnan. (2021). Fuzzy Heuristics and Decision Tree for
363
Classification of Statistical Feature-Based Control Chart Patterns. Symmetry. 13. 110.
364
10.3390/sym13010110.
365
110. Li, Jince & Yang, Bo & Li, Hongguang & Wang, Yongjian & Qi, Chu & Liu, Yi. (2021).
366
DTDR–ALSTM: Extracting dynamic time-delays to reconstruct multivariate data for
367
improving attention-based LSTM industrial time series prediction models. Knowledge-Based
368
Systems. 211. 106508. 10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106508.
369
